--- Page 1 ---
It appears there might be a misunderstanding. The text you've provided is German, not Latin. It looks like a library label.

If you would like me to translate the German text from the label, please confirm. Here is the translation of the German text you provided:

**German Text:**
Bayer. Staatsbibliothek
33
5998

**English Translation:**
Bavarian State Library
33
5998

The numbers `36603783560010` and symbols `Λ`, `S` are likely internal tracking numbers, barcodes, or shelfmarks, and do not form part of a translatable phrase.

--- Page 2 ---
The text you've provided is a description of a library label, and as you've noted, it contains German text and numerical data, not Latin. There is no Latin text present in your submission for me to translate.

The German text on the label, "Bayer. Staatsbibliothek," translates to "Bavarian State Library." The rest are numbers and symbols.

If you have a Latin text you'd like translated, please provide it.

--- Page 3 ---
**Previous page text for continuity:**
H. lit. U. 39

**[Text on the pedestal:]**
OF FR. BACON
Of
VERULAM.
Chancellor of England
CONCERNING
THE ADVANCEMENTS
OF SCIENCES
Book IX.

**[Text in the bottom cartouche:]**
AMSTERDAM,
At the expense of John Ravesteyn. 1662

--- Page 4 ---
**DEAR READER.**

This Work concerning the Advancement of the Sciences, if placed before the same Author's New Organon, not only provides it with necessary light, but also contains the divisions of the sciences which constitute the first part of the Great Instauration, and which the author therefore did not wish to revisit at the very outset of the Organon. I wanted you to know this.

[Rectangular stamp with a double border containing the text:]
ROYAL LIBRARY OF MUNICH.

--- Page 5 ---
[Decorative woodcut border with floral motifs and two faces]

W I L L I A M R A W L E Y,
Professor of Sacred Theology,
Chaplain to the Most Illustrious Lord
Sir F R A N C I S B A C O N
OF V E R U L A M,
Viscount of Saint Alban,
TO THE READER.

[Large decorative initial C] SINCE it has pleased my Lord
to deem me worthy of this
honor, that he has used my labors
in publishing his Works; I have thought it
would not be inappropriate if I briefly
advise the Reader concerning some things
which pertain to this first Volume. This
treatise, concerning the Dignity and Advance-
ment of the Sciences, eight years ago—
A 2       de-

--- Page 6 ---
AD LECTOREM.
lished, in his native tongue, distributed into only two Books, and dedicated to His Royal Majesty, which he does again now. Not so long ago he decided that it should be translated into the Latin Language. For he had heard that it was sought after by foreigners; moreover, he was accustomed to saying from time to time that books written in modern Languages would not much later become obsolete. Therefore, he now publishes its Translation, prepared by certain more distinguished Men of Eloquence, and also corrected by his own Revision. And the first Book certainly is, as it were, a mere Translation, changed in very few things; but the remaining Eight, which set forth the Divisions of the Sciences, and which were contained in a single Book before...

--- Page 7 ---
AD LECTOREM.
were contained, so that it now appears as a *new Work*, and now first published. But the principal reason which moved His Lordship to revise this Work and amplify it in many places, was this: That in the *Great Instauration* (which he published long afterwards) he established the *Divisions of the Sciences* as the first Part of the *Instauration*; which would be followed by the *New Organum*, then the *Natural History*, and so forth. Since therefore he found that part concerning the *Divisions of the Sciences* already worked out long ago (although less thoroughly than the Dignity of the Subject demanded), he thought it would be best if it were revised and brought into a proper and complete work. And in this way he understood his Promise to be fulfilled,

--- Page 8 ---
AD LECTOREM.
...understood his promise to be fulfilled, concerning the first Part of the *Instauration* having been delivered. As for the *work* itself, it is not for my humble ability to preface anything about it. The praise for it, which would be most fitting, I believe would be that which Demosthenes sometimes used to say concerning the deeds of the ancient Athenians: *That Time alone is a worthy praiser for them.* I earnestly pray to God, the Best and Greatest, that in accordance with the *Dignity of the Work*, abundant and lasting fruits may accrue to both the *Author* and the *Reader*.

                                        Parti-

--- Page 9 ---
**Divisions of the Sciences &
Contents of individual
Chapters.**

BOOK II.

CHAP. I.
[Decorative initial P] artition of Universal Human Learning, into History, Poesy, Philosophy: According to the three Faculties of the Intellect; Memory; Imagination; Reason: And that the same Division also applies to Theology.

CHAP. II.
Division of History into Natural, and Civil: Ecclesiastical and Literary (History) being comprised under Civil (History): Division of Natural History, from its Subject, into the History of Generations, Pretergenerations, and Arts.

CHAP. III.
Second Division of Natural History, from its Use and End, into Narra-
          A 4               tive,

--- Page 10 ---
PARTITIONS
-rative, and Inductive; And that the noblest End
of Natural History is, that it may minister, and be in order, for
founding Philosophy; which End the Inductive [History]
regards. Division of the History
of Generations, into the History of celestial bodies, the History of meteors, the History
of the Globe of Earth & Sea: the history
of masses, or greater Collections, and the history of species,
or lesser Collections.

CHAP. IV.
Division of civil history, into Ecclesiastical,
literary, and (which retains the name of the genus) civil: And that
literary history is lacking. Precepts
for composing it.

CHAP. V.
Concerning the dignity & difficulty of civil
history.

CHAP. VI.
First division of civil history (special)
into memoirs, antiquities, &
just history.
                                          CHAP.

--- Page 11 ---
SCIENTIARUM.
OF THE SCIENCES.

C A P. VII.
Division of just history, into chronicles
of times, lives of persons, & accounts
of actions: explanation of these parts.

C A P. VIII.
Division of the history of times, into
universal history, & particular history.
Advantages, & disadvantages of each.

C A P. IX.
Second division of the history of times,
into Annals, & daily records.

C A P. X.
Second division of civil history
(special), into pure, & mixed.

C A P. XI.
Division of Ecclesiastical history; into
special Ecclesiastical (history), history relating to
Prophecies, & history of Nemesis.

A 5 CAP.

--- Page 12 ---
PARTITIONS
CAP. XII.
Concerning the Appendices of history, which
concern the words of men (just as
history itself concerns facts):
Their partition into orations,
epistles, and apophthegms.
CAP. XIII.
Concerning the second principal member
of human doctrine, namely Poesy.
Partition of Poesy into narrative, dramatic,
and parabolic. Three parabolic examples
are proposed.

BOOK III.
CAP. I.
Partition of science into Theology and
Philosophy. Partition of Philosophy into
three doctrines: Concerning God, Concerning
Nature, Concerning Man. Constitution of
First Philosophy, as the common Mother
of all.
CAP. II.
Concerning Natural Theology: and Do-
ctrine

--- Page 13 ---
SCIENTIARUM.
A Doctrine concerning *Angels & Spirits*, which
is an *Appendix* of the same.

CAP. III.
Partition of *Natural Philosophy*, into
*speculative*, and *operative*: and that
those two ought to be separated, both in the intention of the *treatise-writer*,
and in the body of the *treatise*.

CAP. IV.
Partition of the *speculative doctrine concerning Na-*
*ture*, into *Physics*, (*special*,) &
*Metaphysics*: Of which, *Physics* inquires into the *efficient cause*, & *matter*: *Me-*
*taphysics* inquires into the *final cause*, & *form*.
Partition of *Physics* (Spec.) into
*doctrines concerning the principles of things*, concerning the *fa-*
*bric of things*, or concerning the *world*, and concerning the
*variety of things*. Partition of the *doctrine concerning the*
*variety of things*, into the *doctrine concerning*
*concretes*, and the *doctrine concerning abstracts*.
Partition of the *doctrine concerning concretes*, is referred
to the same Partitions which *natural history* embraces. Partition of the *do-*
A

--- Page 14 ---
**PARTITIONS**
the doctrine of abstracts, into the doctrine of
the Schematisms of matter, & the doctrine
of motions. Two appendices of speculative
Physics: Natural problems,
the opinions of ancient philosophers.
The Division of Metaphysics, into the Doctrine
of forms, & the doctrine of final
causes.

CAP. V.
The Division of the operative doctrine of na-
ture, into Mechanics, & Magic:
Which correspond to the speculative
parts: Mechanics to Physics, Magic to Metaphy-
sics. The Expurgation of the term
Magic. Two operative appendices,
An Inventory of human resources, &
A Catalogue of Polychrests.

CAP. VI.
Concerning the Great Mathematical Appendix
of Natural Philosophy, both speculative and operative:
And that it ought to be placed rather
among the Appendices, than among the substantive sciences.
Par-

--- Page 15 ---
SCIENTIARUM.
Division of *Mathematics, into pure, &* *mixed.*

BOOK IV.
CHAP. I.

Division of the *doctrine of man, into* *the Philosophy of humanity, & civil.*
Division of the *Philosophy of humanity, into* *the doctrine concerning the body of man, & the do-* *ctrine concerning the soul of man.*
Establishment of one general doctrine concerning *the nature, or concerning the state of man.*
Division of the *doctrine concerning the state of man, into the do-* *ctrine concerning the person of man, & concerning the bond* *of mind & body.*
Division of the *doctrine concerning the person of man, into the doctrine* *concerning the miseries of man, & concerning his prerogatives.*
Division of the *doctrine concerning the bond, into the do-* *ctrine concerning indications, & concerning impres-* *sions.*
Assignment of *physiognomy &* *the interpretation of natural* *dreams*, to the *doctrine concerning indications.*

CHAP. II.
Division of the *doctrine concerning the body of man,*

--- Page 16 ---
PARTITIONS
*of man, into Medicine, Cosmetics,*
*Athletics,* & *Voluptuary arts.* Division
*of Medicine* into three offices; namely, into
*the preservation of health, the cure*
*of diseases,* & *the prolon-*
*gation of life.* And that the last part concerning the prolon-
gation of life ought to be separated from the two
remaining.

CAP. III.

Division *of human philosophy concerning*
*the soul, into the doctrine of the spirit,*
& *the doctrine of the sensible, or*
*produced, soul.* Second division of the same
*Philosophy,* into the doctrine of *the sub-*
*stance* & *faculties of the soul,* & *the doc-*
*trine of the use,* & *objects of the faculties.*
Two appendices *of the doctrine of the facul-*
*ties of the soul, the doctrine of natural*
*divination,* & *the doctrine of fascination.*
Distribution *of the faculties of the sensi-*
*ble soul, into motion,* & *sense.*

LI-

--- Page 17 ---
SCIENTIARUM.

BOOK V.

CHAP. I.

Division of the doctrine concerning the use and objects of the faculties of the human soul, into Logic and Ethics. Division of Logic, into the arts of inventing, judging, retaining, and transmitting.

CHAP. II.

Division of the inventive (art), into the inventive (art) of arts and arguments: And that the former of these (which is pre-eminent) is wanting. Division of the inventive (art) of arts, into literate experience and the new organ. Delineation of literate experience.

CHAP. III.

Division of the inventive (art) of arguments, into the promptuary and the topical. Division of the topical (art), into the general and the particular. Example of the particular topical (art), in the inquiry concerning heavy and light.

CHAP.

--- Page 18 ---
**DIVISIONS**

**CAP. IV.**

Division of the art of judging, into judgment by induction, and by syllogism. Of which the former is assigned to the new organ. First division of judgment by syllogism, into direct reduction, and inverse. Its second division, into analytics, and the doctrine of Elenchi. Division of the doctrine of Elenchi, into Elenchi of sophisms, Elenchi of Interpretation, and Elenchi of images, or idols. Division of idols, into idols of the tribe, idols of the cave, and idols of the marketplace. Appendix of the art of judging, namely: On the Analogy of demonstrations according to the Nature of the subject.

**CAP. V.**

Division of the art of retaining or retentive art, into the doctrine concerning aids to memory, and the doctrine concerning memory itself. Division of the doctrine concerning memory itself, into prenotion, and emblem.

**BOOK**

--- Page 19 ---
SCIENTIARUM.

BOOK VI.

CHAP. I.

Traditional Partition; into the doctrine of the
organ of speech, the doctrine of the metho-
d of speech, & the doctrine of the illustra-
tion of speech. Division of the doctrine of the
organ of speech, into the doctrine of the signs
of things, of utterance, & of writing.
Of which the two latter constitute Gram-
mar, and are its divisions.
Division of the doctrine of the signs of things,
into Hieroglyphics, & Real Charac-
ters. Second division of Grammar, into
literary, & philosophical. Addi-
tion of Poesy as regards meter, to the
doctrine of utterance. Addition
of the doctrine of ciphers, to the doctrine of
writing.

CHAP. II.

The doctrine of the Method of speech,
is constituted as a substantive & principal
part of the traditional (art/science). A name
is given to it: traditional prudence.
The Metho-

--- Page 20 ---
P A R T I T I O N S
_Different kinds of Method,_ and their
advantages and disadvantages are subjoined.

C H A P. III.

_Concerning the foundations and function of the doctrine_
_of the illustration of discourse, or Rhetoric._ Three
appendices of _Rhetoric_, which pertain
only to the _promptuary_: _colors of good and evil, both_
_simple and comparative: antitheses_
_of things: minor formulas of speeches._

C H A P. IV.

Two general appendices of _traditive_
doctrine, _critical, and pedagogical._

B O O K VII.

C H A P. I.

Division of _Ethics_, into the _doctrine_ of
the _exemplar, and the Georgics of the mind._ Divi-
sion of the _exemplar (namely, of good) into simple_
_good, and comparative good._ Divi-
sion of _simple good, into individual_
_good, and the good of communion._
                                        C H A P.

--- Page 21 ---
SCIENTIARUM.

C A P. II.
Division of individual good, or of propriety,
into active good and passive good. Division of
passive good, into conservative good, and perfective
good. Division of the good of communion, into
general duties, and respective duties.

C A P. III.
Division of the doctrine concerning the cultivation of the
mind, into the doctrine concerning the characters of
minds, concerning affections, and concerning remedies,
or cures. Appendix of the same doctrine, concerning
the congruence between the good of the mind, and the good of the body.

L I B E R VIII.

C A P. I.
Division of civil doctrine, into the doctrine
concerning conduct, the doctrine concerning
affairs, and the doctrine concerning Empire,
or the Republic.

CAP.

--- Page 22 ---
DIVISION OF THE SCIENCES.
CHAPTER II.
Division of the doctrine concerning business, into
the doctrine concerning scattered occasions, and
the doctrine concerning the scope of life. Example
of the doctrine concerning scattered occasions,
from some parables of Solomon.
Precepts concerning the scope of life.
CHAPTER III.
Divisions of the doctrine concerning Empire
or Republic are omitted: Only access
is made to two desired topics: The doctrine
concerning extending the boundaries of Empire, and the doctrine
concerning universal justice, or
concerning the sources of law: Examples of both.
BOOK IX.
CHAPTER I.
Divisions of inspired Theology are
omitted: Only access is made to three
desired topics: the doctrine concerning the legitimate use
of human reason in divine matters, the doctrine
concerning the degrees of unity in the City
of God, and the emanations of the scriptures.
FRAN-

--- Page 23 ---
I

FRAN-

--- Page 24 ---
2 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
they call: a capacity of intellect embracing so many and such great things, firmness of memory, swiftness of apprehension, penetration of judgment, and order, together with facility, of elocution. Indeed, that Platonic dogma sometimes comes to mind, by which it is asserted, *that knowledge is nothing other than* *Reminiscence; and that the soul naturally* *knows all things, being restored from time to time to its native light, which the cave* *of the body had obscured.* Certainly of this matter (if in any other) a remarkable example shines forth in Your Majesty; whose mind is so ready to conceive a flame, when even the slightest occasion presented has excited it, or the smallest spark of another's knowledge has gleamed. Therefore, just as Sacred Scripture relates concerning the wisest of kings, *that his heart was, as it were, the sand* *of the Sea:* whose mass, though very great, yet its parts are most minute; so God has endowed Your Majesty with a truly wonderful texture of mind, which, while it embraces the greatest things, yet apprehends the smallest, and does not suffer them to escape: whereas it seems very difficult, or rather impossible in Nature, that the same Instrument should aptly arrange both great Works and small. As for your Elocution, that saying of Cornelius Tacitus concerning Augustus Caesar comes to mind; *Augustus, he says, possessed a flowing* *eloquence, and such as befitted a prince.* Indeed, if we rightly weigh the matter,

--- Page 25 ---
L I B E R I. 3
—sider the matter, every discourse, whether laborious, or affe-
cted, or imitative, although otherwise excel-
lent, smells of something servile, and is not its own master.
But your style of speaking is truly Royal,
flowing as from a Fountain, and never-
theless, as the Order of Nature demands, drawn off into its own
streams, full of ease and felicity, imitating no one, inimitable by anyone.

And just as in your affairs, which pertain as much to the King-
dom as to your House, Virtue seems to contend with Fortune;
namely, the best morals with a fortunate rule;
your hopes formerly patiently and piously restrained,
with the propitious and opportune attainment of what was hoped for;
the holy faith of the Conjugal Bed, with the blessed
fruit of Matrimony, in a most beautiful Offspring;
your pious and most worthy inclination towards peace
for a Christian Prince, with a similar inclination of neighboring
Princes, happily concurring in the same wish: So also in the endow-
ments of your intellect no less a contention and rivalry arises,
if we compare those [endowments] which have been granted and
infused by Nature herself, with the most amply furnished treasury
of manifold Erudition, and the Knowledge of very many
Arts. Nor indeed would it be easy to find any King born
after Christ who could be compared to your Majesty
in the variety and cultivation of Divine and Human Letters.
Whoever wishes, let him run through the series of Emperors and
Kings, and he will agree with me. Certainly something
                                                                    great

--- Page 26 ---
4          DE AUGM. SCIENT.
dam Kings seem to achieve, if, by tasting lightly
the intellects of others, they gain wisdom concisely, or
if they stick somewhat to the surface of learning,
or finally if they love and elevate learned men.
But for a King, and a King by birth, to have drawn from the true
founts of Learning, indeed, to be himself the very fount
of Learning, is little short of a Miracle. But to Your
Majesty this also accrues, that in the same cabinet of your breast, Sacred
Letters are stored with profane ones, so that,
like that Hermes Trismegistus, you are distinguished by a triple glory:
by the Power of a King, by the Illumination
of a Priest, and by the Learning of a Philosopher. Since
therefore you far surpass other Kings in this praise (which is properly
yours), it is right that it be celebrated not
only by the fame and admiration of the present Age,
or even by the light of histories be transmitted to
posterity, but that it be engraved in some solid Work,
which both denotes the power of a Great King,
and reflects the Image of a King so remarkably Learned.
   Wherefore (to return to my undertaking), no
more fitting Offering seemed to me than some Treatise
directed to that end. The subject of this
consisted of two Parts. In the former (which
is lighter, yet by no means to be omitted),
the excellence of Science and Letters in all things
must be treated; and at the same time concerning the Merit of those
who strenuously and judiciously apply themselves to advancing them.
                                                                    Po-

--- Page 27 ---
L I B E R I. 5
But the latter Part (which is the main point) will set forth what has been done and perfected in this kind up to now; moreover, it will touch upon those things which seem to be lacking; so that although I may not dare to set aside or choose anything in particular to commend to your Majesty, nevertheless, by representing many and various things, I may be able to excite your Royal Thoughts, so that you may bring forth the treasures of your own Breast, and thence, according to your magnanimity and wisdom, draw forth the very best things for advancing the boundaries of Arts and Sciences.

In the very Vestibule of the former Part, for clearing the way, and as it were, proclaiming silence, so that the Testimonies concerning the Dignity of Letters may be better heard without the barking of silent Objections, I have decided in the first place to free letters from the reproaches and contempt with which Ignorance assails them; but Ignorance, under not one guise: now in the Jealousy of Theologians, now in the Arrogance of Politicians, now manifesting and betraying itself in the errors of the Literati themselves. I hear the first ones saying that Knowledge is among those things which are to be admitted sparingly and cautiously. That too much Appetite for Knowledge was the first Sin, whence the Fall of Man; and that even today something serpentine adheres to it, since, entering, it induces swelling; _Knowledge puffs up._ That Solomon judged: _Of making books there is no_
B

--- Page 28 ---
6	Dᴇ Aᴜɢᴍ. Sᴄɪᴇɴᴛ.
*of making many books there is no end, and much study is a weariness of the flesh; and elsewhere, In much wisdom there is much grief, and he that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow.* St. Paul warned, *Beware lest we be deceived by empty Philosophy:* Moreover, experience shows that the most learned Men, the leaders of Heretics; and the most learned Ages, have been prone to Atheism; and finally, that the contemplation of Secondary Causes detracts from the authority of the Primary Cause.

   Therefore, to reveal the falsity of this Dogma and its ill-laid Foundations, it is evident to anyone that these people do not perceive that the Knowledge which brought forth the Fall was not that pure, original Natural Knowledge, by the light of which Man imposed Names on the Animals brought to him in Paradise; but rather that proud knowledge *of Good and Evil*, through which he sought to cast off God and establish law for himself. Nor indeed does any power of Knowledge, however great, inflate the mind, since nothing can fill the Soul, much less distend it, except God and the contemplation of God. Wherefore Solomon, speaking of the two principal senses of Discovery (Sight and Hearing), says, *The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing.* And if there is no filling, it follows that the Container is greater than the Contained. No otherwise concerning Knowledge itself, and the human Mind (to which the Senses are like Emissaries)
                                                                    defi-

--- Page 29 ---
L I B E R I. 7
defines with these words, which he appends to his Calendar and Ephemeris, describing the times of all things, thus concluding: *God has made everything beautiful in its time. He has also set the world in their heart, yet man cannot find out the work that God does from beginning to end.* By these words he not obscurely hints that God has fashioned the human mind like a mirror, capable of the whole world, and thirsting for it no less than the eye thirsts for light; nor merely eager to behold the varieties and changes of Times, but also ambitious to scrutinize and explore the unmoving and inviolable Laws and Decrees of Nature. And although he seems to imply that supreme economy of Nature (which he calls *the work that God does from beginning to end*) cannot be discovered by Man, this does not detract from human capacity, but should be attributed to the impediments of Learning; such as the brevity of life, the distractions of studies, the corrupt and unfaithful transmission of sciences, and many other inconveniences by which the human condition is entangled. Indeed, he teaches clearly enough elsewhere that no part of the Universe is alien from human inquiry, saying: *The spirit of man is the lamp of the Lord, searching all the innermost parts.* Therefore, if the amplitude of human capacity is so great, it is manifest that there is no danger from

B 2 quan-

--- Page 30 ---
8      ON THE AUGMENTATION OF THE SCIENCES.
quantity of Knowledge, however diffused, lest it induce either swel-
ling or excess: but only from its quality,
which, however small it may be, if taken without its proper Antidote,
has something malignant and
poisonous, full of flatulent symptoms.
This Antidote, or Spice (whose mixture tempers
Knowledge and makes it most wholesome) is *Charity*.
Which the Apostle also adds to the former clause, saying,
*Knowledge puffs up, but charity edifies*. Consistent with
this is what he teaches elsewhere: *If, he says,*
*I speak with the tongues of angels or of men,*
*but have not charity, I am become*
*as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal*.
Not that it is not something excellent to speak with the Tongues
of Angels and Men, but because if it is separated
from Charity, and is not directed to the common good
of the Human Race, it will rather exhibit empty
glory than solid fruit. As for Solomon's censure
concerning the excess of reading and writing Books, and
the vexation of spirit arising from Knowledge;
and also Paul's admoni-
tion, *Let us not be deceived by*
*vain philosophy*: if these things are rightly explained,
they will best show the true bounds by which
human knowledge is enclosed, yet so that it is free
for it, without any restriction, to embrace the entire
nature of things. For there are three limits. The first, lest we so
place happiness in Knowledge that meanwhile
forgetfulness of our Mortality creeps in. Se-
                                                                cond,

--- Page 31 ---
L I B E R I.	9
Second, that we do not so use knowledge as to produce anxiety, not tranquility of mind. Third, that we do not think ourselves able, through the contemplation of Nature, to attain Divine Mysteries. For as to the first, Solomon explains himself excellently elsewhere in the same Book. "I have clearly seen enough," he says, "that Wisdom recedes from folly as much as Light from Darkness. The wise man's eyes are in his head, but the fool wanders in darkness; yet at the same time I have learned that the necessity of dying is common to both."

Concerning the second, it is certain that no anxiety or disturbance of mind arises from Knowledge, except only by accident. For all Knowledge, and Admiration (which is the seed of Knowledge), is pleasant in itself; but when conclusions are deduced from it, which, obliquely applied to our affairs, either generate weak fears or immoderate desires, then at last is born that Torment and Disturbance of mind of which we speak: for then Knowledge is no longer *dry light* (as that obscure Heraclitus wished, *dry light is the best soul*), but it becomes moist light, and soaked with the humors of the Passions.

The third rule demands a somewhat more accurate discussion, and must not be passed over lightly. For if anyone, from the contemplation of Sensible and Material Things, should hope to attain so much Light as to reveal the Divine Nature or Will
	B 3	suffi-

--- Page 32 ---
10      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
suffice, lest he be deceived by empty philo-
sophy. For indeed, the Contemplation of Creatures,
as far as the Creatures themselves are concerned, produces Know-
ledge; as far as God is concerned, only Admiration;
which is, as it were, knowledge cut short. There-
fore, a certain Platonist most wisely said: that human
senses are like the sun, which indeed re-
veals the earthly globe, but seals off the heavens and the stars.
Thus the senses reveal natural things, they shut off Di-
vine things. And hence it comes about that some
from the company of the more learned have fallen into heresy,
when, relying on the waxed wings of the senses, they
strove to fly up to divine things. For those,
who maintain that excessive Knowledge inclines
the mind to Atheism; and that ignorance
of Secondary Causes assists piety towards the Pri-
mary: I would gladly address with
Job's question, Is it right to lie for
God, and is it fitting to speak deceitfully for his sake,
so that we may please him? For it is clear that God
ordinarily works nothing in nature, except through
secondary (causes). If they wished the opposite of this to be believed,
it would be pure imposture, as if to curry favor with God,
and nothing other than to sacrifice to the Author of truth an un-
clean offering of falsehood.
But rather, it is most certain, and proven by expe-
rience, that superficial tastes in philo-
sophy perhaps move one to Atheism,
but deeper draughts lead back to Religion.
For at the threshold of Philosophy, when
secondary causes, as if closest to the senses, are pre-

--- Page 33 ---
B O O K I. 11
may intrude themselves upon the Human Mind, and the Mind itself
may cling to them, and dwell upon them, (so that) forgetfulness
of the primary Cause may creep in. But if anyone proceeds fur-
ther, and contemplates the Depen-
dence, Series, & Concatenation of Causes, and
the works of providence, then according
to the Mythology of the Poets he will easily believe
that the Highest Ring of the Natural Chain is affixed to the Foot
of Jupiter's Throne. In a word, let no one,
seeking the reputation of ill-applied sobriety and modera-
tion, imagine that we can proceed too
far, in the books either of the Scriptures, or of the Crea-
tures, in Theology or Philosophy; let men
rather rouse themselves, and boldly press on and pursue infinite progress on both
sides; taking care only, lest they use
Knowledge for swelling (pride), not for chari-
ty, for ostentation, not for use; and
again, lest they unskillfully mix and confound
those distinct doctrines of Theology and Philo-
sophy, and their streams.
    Let us now approach the Reproaches, with which
Politicians bespatter learning. They are of this kind:
that the Arts soften minds, and render them unfit for Military Glory;
then also in political matters they corrupt Wits;
which they render either too curi-
ous from the Variety of Reading; or too
stubborn from the Rigor of Rules; or too
swollen from the Magnitude of Examples; or
too extravagant from the Dissimilarity of Ex-
amples: but at least somehow they turn a-
                B 4                                  way

--- Page 34 ---
12      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
and alienate minds from business and action, instilling a love of leisure and retirement; then to introduce a relaxation of discipline into republics, while everyone is more ready to dispute than to obey. Hence Cato the Censor, one of the wisest of mortals, when Roman youth, captivated by the sweetness and majesty of his eloquence, flocked from all sides to Carneades the philosopher, who had come to Rome as an ambassador, advised in a full Senate that, once their business was dispatched, they should dismiss the man as soon as possible, lest he infect and bewitch the minds of the citizens; and, unbeknownst to them, introduce a change in their ancestral customs and manners. This also moved Virgil (while he postponed his own studies to the estimation of his country) to separate political arts from literary ones, claiming the former for the Romans, leaving the latter to the Greeks, in those celebrated verses;
       *Remember, Roman, to rule the peoples with your sway;*
       *These shall be your arts.*
We also see Anytus, the accuser of Socrates, charging him with the crime that by the force and truth of his speeches and disputations, he diminished the authority and reverence for the laws and ancestral customs among the young; and that he professed an art pernicious and full of danger, by which

--- Page 35 ---
L I B E R I. 13
by which one, being equipped, would make a worse cause better, and would overwhelm truth itself with the apparatus of Eloquence.

But these accusations, and others of the same ilk, rather display a feigned Gravity than the Candor of Truth. For Experience testifies that just as one and the same men, so one and the same eras, have flourished with the glory both of Military Affairs and of the Best Arts.

As for men, let a noble pair of generals be an example: Alexander the Great, and Julius Caesar the Dictator; the one a Disciple of Aristotle in Philosophy, the other a Rival of Cicero in speaking. Or if anyone should rather seek learned men who became famous generals, than generals who were remarkably learned, there is at hand Epaminondas the Theban, or Xenophon the Athenian: of whom the former was the first who broke the power of the Spartans; but the latter the first who paved the way for the overthrow of the Monarchy of the Persians.

But that quasi-marriage of Arms and Letters shines forth more clearly still in Eras than in Persons, inasmuch as, of course, an Age is a grander Object than a Man. For indeed, the very same Eras, among the Egyptians, Assyrians, Persians, Greeks, and Romans, which are most celebrated for their Military Virtue, were also greatly ennobled by Letters; so much so that the most weighty

--- Page 36 ---
14      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
most weighty authors and philosophers, and most famous
leaders and and emperors, lived in the same
century. Nor indeed can it be otherwise,
since just as in Man the Vigor of Body
and Mind almost simultaneously mature,
except that the former slightly precedes the latter: so in
Republics, military glory and learned glory
(of which the former corresponds to the Body, the latter to the Mind)
are either coeval, or follow each other very closely.
   But now, that learning is an impediment to politics
rather than an aid, nothing is less probable.
We all confess that it is a rash thing
to entrust the Body and the care of Health to Empiric Physicians, who
are accustomed to peddle a few certain medicines, which
seem to them to be panaceas,
in reliance on which they dare to attempt anything and everything,
though they understand neither the Causes of Diseases, nor
the Habits of the Sick, nor the Dangers of
Symptoms, nor the true Method of Healing.
We see likewise that those err who, to settle
their Causes and Lawsuits, employ petty lawyers,
versed more in Practice than in books of Law,
whose mouth is easily baffled if anything new, or
outside the beaten paths of their experience occurs:
similarly it cannot but be most dangerous,
whenever the highest affairs are entrusted especially to Empiric Counselors. On the contrary,
scarcely an example can be adduced of a Republic unhappily
                                                                    ter

--- Page 37 ---
L I B E R I. 15
ter administered, with Learned Men at the helm.
For although it is customary for politicians to disparage
learned men by the name of 'pedants'; History, however, *the
mistress of truth*, in many instances gives credence to the fact
that minor princes have far surpassed adults, notwithstanding the
disadvantage of their age, for that very reason which politicians
mock, namely, that at that time the empire was administered by
their tutors. Who does not know that during that much-vaunted
five-year period of Nero, the burden of affairs rested upon Seneca,
his tutor? Indeed, even Gordian the Younger owed a decade of
praise to Misitheus, his tutor. Nor did Alexander Severus govern
the empire less successfully while he was a minor, at which
time all things were managed by women, but with the advice of
his preceptors. Indeed, let us turn our eyes to the Pontifical
Government, and specifically to Pius V or Sixtus V, in our own
century, who in their early days were considered mere friars,
inexperienced in affairs: and we shall find that the acts of Popes
of that kind are usually more memorable than those of men who,
having been nurtured in civil affairs and the courts of princes,
ascended to the Papacy. For although those who have spent
their lives primarily in letters may be less astute and versatile in
seizing opportunities and adapting affairs; to which pertain those
things which are called by the Italians *Reasons of State*, the very
name of which Pius V detested, being accustomed
B 6

--- Page 38 ---
16      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
customed to saying, *that they were mere inventions of wicked men, which were opposed to Religion and Moral virtues:* in this, however, there is ample compensation, that through the safe and plain path of Religion, Justice, Honesty, and Moral Virtues, they proceed promptly and expeditiously: those who have constantly held to this path will no more need those other remedies than a healthy Body needs Medicine. Furthermore, the course of life in one man cannot supply a sufficiency of Examples for governing the events of life, even in one man. For just as it sometimes happens that a Grandson or Great-grandson resembles a Grandfather or Great-grandfather more than his Father: in the same way it not rarely happens that present affairs fit better with older Examples than with more recent ones. Lastly, the genius of one man yields as much to the Amplitude of Letters as a private income to the Treasury.

      But if it be granted that those corruptions and impediments, which are imputed to letters by politicians, have some force and truth: yet at the same time it must be observed that Erudition brings more Remedy than harm in individuals. For granted that Letters, by a certain silent force, render the Mind uncertain and perplexed; yet certainly they clearly prescribe how thoughts are to be disentangled, and how far deliberation should proceed, when finally

--- Page 39 ---
L I B E R I. 17
a decision must be made; nay, they show how
matters can in the meantime be protracted and
suspended without danger. Granted also, they make
minds more stubborn and difficult; but at the same time they teach
what things rest on Demonstrations, and what
on Conjectures; nor do they less set forth the
use of Distinctions and Exceptions, than the
constancy of Canons and Principles.
Granted again, they lead and distort minds by
the inequality or dissimilarity of Examples.
I know not; but I know well enough that they
explain both the efficacies of circumstances,
and the errors of comparisons, and the cautions
of applications, so that on the whole they correct
minds more than they corrupt them. Moreover,
Literature everywhere insinuates these Remedies,
with great force and variety of Examples.
Let anyone weigh the Errors of Clement VII,
so clearly depicted by Guicciardini, who was, as
it were, his familiar; or the vacillations of Cicero,
cut to the quick by his own hand in his letters
to Atticus; he will altogether avoid Inconstancy
and frequent Changes of Counsel: Let him inspect
the Errors of Phocion; he will abhor Obstinacy:
Let him read the Fable of Ixion; and he will dispel
excessive hopes, and such Fumes and Mists.
Let him contemplate Cato the Younger; nor will
he ever migrate to the Antipodes, and fix his
footsteps contrary to the present Age.
      Now those who think that Literature is Friendly
                                                                  to Idleness,

--- Page 40 ---
18      On the Advancement of Learning.
...and that it imbues the mind with the sweetness of leisure and solitude, will make a strange assertion if those things which accustom the mind to perpetual activity should prove to be patrons of idleness. Whereas on the contrary it can truly be affirmed that among all types of men, no one loves business for the sake of business itself, except the man of letters. For some love affairs and business for the sake of gain, like hired workers [love] work for the sake of pay. Others for the sake of honor; for while they conduct affairs, they live in the eyes of men, and serve their reputation, which would otherwise vanish. Others for the sake of power, and the prerogative of fortune, so that they may reward friends and punish enemies. Others so that they may exercise some faculty of theirs, which they love, and often congratulate themselves and smile on this account. Finally, others so that they may achieve other ends of their own.

To such an extent that, what is usually said of the vainglorious, that their courage lies in the eyes of the beholders, so the diligence and strenuousness of such men seems to aim at this: either that others may applaud, or that they themselves may exult within themselves.

Only men of letters delight in business and occupations, as actions agreeable to nature, and no less wholesome for the mind than exercise is for the body, looking at the thing itself, not the profit; so that they are the least weary of all, if only the matter is of such a kind that it may engage the mind according to its dignity.

--- Page 41 ---
L I B E R I. 19
fill, and occupy it. But if sometimes some are found who are diligent in reading, but sluggish in acting, this does not originate from learning, but from a certain weakness and softness of Body or Mind; such as Seneca observes. "Some," he says, "are so reclusive that they think whatever is in the light is in turmoil." It might perhaps happen that those conscious of such a disposition devote themselves to learning; but learning itself by no means implants or produces such dispositions. But if anyone nevertheless stubbornly maintains that learning consumes too much time, which could otherwise be more properly spent; I say that no one is so engrossed in business but that he has his intervals of leisure, until the turns and tides of action recede, unless he is either very dull in dispatching business, or too little ambitious with dignity in seizing business of any kind. It remains therefore to be asked, in what, and how, these spare hours ought to be employed; in studies or pleasures, should one indulge one's inclination or one's intellect? Just as Demosthenes rightly replied to Aeschines, a man devoted to pleasures. When Aeschines had reproachfully objected that his orations smelled of the lamp, Demosthenes said: "By Pollux! there is a great difference between what you and I do by lamplight." Therefore, it is by no means to be feared that learning might eliminate business; but rather they reclaim the mind from idleness and pleasure, which otherwise gradually, to both

--- Page 42 ---
20      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
...to the harm of both Business and Letters, are accustomed to creep in.

   Next, the objection they raise, that Letters undermine the Reverence for Laws and Empire, is a mere calumny, not even probably brought forward for accusation. For whoever would contend that blind obedience binds more strongly than enlightened duty, would at the same time assert that a blind man led by hand walks more surely than one who uses Light and Eyes. Indeed, beyond all controversy, the Arts soften manners, render them tender, compliant, pliable, and amenable to the commands of the Empire; Ignorance, on the contrary, makes them stubborn, refractory, seditious. Which is most clearly evident from history, inasmuch as the most unlearned, uncultivated, barbarous times have been most prone to tumults, seditions, and changes.

   Concerning the judgment of Cato the Censor, let this be said: that he suffered the most deserved penalties for his blasphemy against Letters, when, older than seventy, as if becoming a boy again, he most eagerly learned the Greek Language. From which it is clear that that former censure of Greek Literature flowed rather from an affected seriousness than from what he truly felt deep down. But as for Virgil's poems, however much it pleased him to insult the whole world, by asserting for the Romans the Arts of Ruling, while leaving the others, as if common, to others; in this, however, he is clearly held (to account), that the Romans never (achieved) the height of Empire—

--- Page 43 ---
LIBER I. 21
had ascended to the summit, until they had simultaneously reached the peak of the Arts. For, to the two first Caesars, men most skilled in ruling, were contemporaries that very best Poet, Virgil Maro, the best Historian, Titus Livius, the best Antiquarian, Marcus Varro, the best or next-to-best Orator, Marcus Cicero; certainly leaders, from all memory, each in his own field. Finally, as to the Accusation of Socrates, I say only this; Let us remember the times in which it was brought; namely, under the Thirty Tyrants, the cruelest, most wicked of all mortals, and most unworthy of rule. After that cycle of affairs and times had revolved, that Socrates (the supposed criminal, of course) was numbered among the Heroes, and his memory was heaped with all honors, both Divine and Human: moreover, his disputations, previously held as Corrupters of Morals, were celebrated by all Posterity as the most effective Antidotes for Mind and Morals. And let these things suffice for responding to the Politicians, who, with supercilious severity, or feigned gravity, have dared to attack letters with insults; which refutation, however, for the present, might seem less necessary, unless we consider whether our labors will endure to posterity; since the Countenance and Favor of two most learned Princes, Queen Elizabeth, and Maje-

--- Page 44 ---
22 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCES
Your Majesty's, like Castor and Pollux, *Bright Stars*, have won so much love and reverence for Letters among us in Britain.

Now we come to the third kind of disparagement, which redounds from the learned themselves upon Letters, and usually sticks deeper than the others. These (criticisms) derive their origin either from Fortune, or from Morals; or from their own Studies. Of which the first is beyond their power, the second is beside the point; so that only the third properly seems to come into question. However, because the discourse is to be established not so much about the true Weight of Things, as about the estimation of the Common People, it will not be amiss to hint at a few things concerning the other two as well.

Therefore, the diminutions of dignity, and as it were, disgraces, which are imposed upon Letters by the Fortune of the learned, are taken either from their poverty and want, or from an obscure and shadowy kind of life, or from the not very noble subject of the occupations in which they are engaged.

As far as poverty is concerned, and because it frequently happens that the learned are poor, and for the most part of humble origin, nor do they grow rich as quickly as others who only gape after gain: it would be advisable to hand over this topic, concerning the praise of poverty, to the mendicant friars (with their leave, I would say) to adorn; to whom Machiavelli

--- Page 45 ---
L I B E R I. 23
lus attributed no small importance, when he said,
*“Long ago it would have been over with the kingdom of priests,*
*if reverence for the friars and monks had not compensated for the*
*luxury and excess of the bishops.”*
Similarly one might say that the happiness and magnificence of Princes and nobles could long ago have fallen back into barbarism and squalor, if they did not owe to these poor learned men the cultivation and adornment of civil life. But leaving aside these pursuits of praise, it is worthy of note how sacred and venerable a thing poverty itself was considered among the Romans for several centuries; though that Republic drew nothing from paradoxes. For thus T. Livy prefaces: *“Either the love of the task I have undertaken deceives me,*
*or no Republic ever was greater, nor more righteous, nor richer in good*
*examples, nor into which avarice and luxury immigrated so late, nor where*
*such great and long-lasting honor was paid to poverty and frugality.”*
Indeed, even after Rome had already degenerated, we read that when Caesar the Dictator professed that he would restore the collapsed Republic, one of his friends put forth the opinion that nothing was so expedient for what he was undertaking as if the honor of riches were abolished in any way. But (he said) *“these, and all evils, will cease together with the honor*
*of money, if neither magistracies, nor other things commonly desired, are for sale.”*
Finally, just as it has been truly said, *“That blush is the color of virtue,”* although sometimes
                                        oria-

--- Page 46 ---
24      Oɴ Tʜᴇ Aᴜɢᴍ. Oғ Sᴄɪᴇɴᴄᴇs.
though it sometimes arises from fault; so you would rightly establish that poverty is the fortune of virtue, although it is sometimes brought on by luxury and carelessness. Certainly this is Solomon's saying, *He who hastens to riches will not be innocent:* and the precept, *Buy truth, and do not sell it, likewise knowledge and prudence;* as if he judges it right that wealth should be spent so that learning may be acquired, not that learning should be turned to that end, that riches may be amassed.
    What need is there to speak of that private and obscure life, which they object to scholars? So worn a theme it is, and cast about by all, to prefer leisure and retirement (provided idleness and luxury are absent) to a public and busy life, on account of security, liberty, sweetness, dignity, or at least immunity from indignities, that no one treats this topic without treating it well: so much does it accord with human concepts in experience, and with general agreement in approval. I will only add this, that learned men, hidden in states and living least under the eyes of men, are like the images of Cassius and Brutus, concerning whom, when they were not carried in Junia's funeral procession, while many others were, Tacitus says, *By that very fact they shone forth, because they were not seen.*
    Concerning the meanness of the occupations entrusted to scholars, this occurs, that to them are entrusted the children and younger

--- Page 47 ---
L I B E R I. 25
...the instruction of boys and young men, the contempt for which age redounds upon the teachers themselves. Moreover, how unjust this detraction is, if the matter is weighed not by popular opinion but by sound judgment, one may estimate from this: that all are more diligent in imbuing a fresh vessel than an old one; and are more anxious about what kind of soil they apply to a tender plant than to an adult one. From this it is clear that the principal care is concerned with the beginnings of things and bodies. Lend an ear, if you please, to the Rabbis: "Your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams." From this text they gather that youth is a more worthy age, inasmuch as, of course, revelation comes more clearly through visions than through dreams. But this is altogether worthy of note: that although pedagogues, like apes of tyranny, are the laughingstock of the stage, and the carelessness of the times, as it were, has fallen asleep in their selection, yet there is an old complaint, handed down from the best and most prudent ages, that the Commonwealth indeed busies itself too much with laws, but is negligent concerning education. This most noble part of ancient discipline has been recalled to some extent, as if by right of postliminy, in the Colleges of the Jesuits; when I contemplate their industry and skill, both in cultivating doctrine and in forming morals, that saying of Agesilaus to Pharnabazus comes to mind: "Since you are such a man, I wish you were ours." And thus far concerning the reproaches from the learned...

--- Page 48 ---
26      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
—derived from the fortune and condition of learned men.
    As for the morals of learned men, this is a matter pertaining more to individuals than to studies. Without doubt, among them are found, just as in all orders and kinds of life, both bad and good; nor is it therefore untrue (as is asserted) that studies pass into morals; and that learning, unless it falls into very depraved minds, entirely corrects nature and changes it for the better.
    Nevertheless, as I diligently and honestly assess the matter, no disgrace occurs to me as adhering to learning from the morals of learned men, insofar as they are learned; unless perhaps this is considered a fault (of which Demosthenes, Cicero, Cato the Younger, Seneca, and many others are accused): that since generally the times about which they read are better than those in which they live, and what is taught is better than what is done, they contend beyond what is proper, [to bring] the corruptions of morals to the precept.

--- Page 49 ---
L I B E R I. 27
he himself, though he could bear it, abstained from every public office, saying, *“Thus one must deal with one’s country as with parents; that is, by persuasion, not by violence, by entreating, not by contending.”* And this very thing he guards against, who was among Caesar’s counselors, *“We do not,” he says, “recall to ancient institutions, which have long since become a mockery due to corrupt morals.”* Cicero also accuses Cato the Younger of error, writing to his Atticus: *“Cato thinks excellently, but sometimes harms the Republic. For he speaks as if in Plato’s Republic, not as if in the dregs of Romulus.”* The same Cicero, with a gentle interpretation, excuses the sayings of philosophers and their harsher decrees: *“These very teachers and masters,” he says, “seem to have extended the boundaries of duties a little further than nature would wish, so that when we had striven to the utmost in spirit, we might nevertheless stop there, where it is fitting.”* He himself, however, could have said, *“I myself am less than my own precepts:”* since he himself, though not so gravely, stumbled upon the same stone.

Another fault, which perhaps not undeservedly is objected to the learned, is of this kind: that they have postponed their own fortunes or safeguards to the honor or advantage of their own countries or dominions. For thus Demosthenes to his Athenians, *“My counsels,” he says, “if you attend to them rightly, are not of the kind by which I might be great among you, and you might be held in contempt among the Greeks; but such that it is often not safe for me to give them, but always useful for you to embrace them.”*

--- Page 50 ---
28      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
to embrace. No differently Seneca, after that five-
year period of Nero, which he had consecrated to the eternal
glory of learned teachers, did not cease to admonish his
master, already most defiled by all manner of crimes,
freely and confidently, to his great peril, and finally
to his downfall. Nor can things be otherwise:
since indeed learning imbues the human mind with a true
sense of its own fragility, of the instability of
fortune, of the dignity of the soul, and of its own duty;
mindful of these things, they can in no way persuade
themselves that the greatness of their own fortune
can be established as the chief end of goods for themselves.
Therefore they live, as if they were to render an account
to God, and to their Lords after God, whether to Kings,
or to Republics, with this formula, *Behold, I have profited
for you*, but not with that, *Behold, I have profited for myself*.
But the crowd of politicians, whose minds are not
instructed and confirmed in the doctrine of duties, and
in the contemplation of the universal good, refer everything
to themselves; bearing themselves as the center of the world,
as if all lines ought to converge in themselves, and in their
own fortunes; not at all anxious concerning the Ship of the
Republic, although tossed by storms, provided that for themselves
a refuge and an escape be given in the skiff of their own affairs.
But on the contrary, those who have learned the weights of
duties, and the limits of self-love, defend their own duties
and stations, although with danger. But if by chance they
remain unharmed in seditions, and changes of things, not that
                                                                    skill-

--- Page 51 ---
L I B E R I. 29
...to skills, or versatile genius, but to the reverence which integrity extorts even from enemies, is it to be attributed. Moreover, concerning the constancy of faith and the sacredness of duties, which learning certainly implants in the minds of men, however much these may sometimes be punished by fortune, or condemned by the unsound principles of politicians, nevertheless they will openly, indeed, bring praise among all, so that in this matter, there is no need for a long defense.

   Another fault common to learned men, which can be more easily excused than denied, is this, namely, that they do not easily apply and accommodate themselves to the persons with whom they do business or live. Which defect arises from two causes: The first is the greatness of the mind itself, on account of which they can with difficulty humble themselves to the deference of any single man. These are the words of a lover, not a wise man: *We are a sufficiently large theater for another.* Nor, however, will I deny that he who cannot equally contract and expand the keenness of his mind, like an eye, is deprived of a remarkable faculty for managing affairs. But the second cause is integrity of morals and simplicity; which nevertheless indicates a discernment of judgment, not a defect, in them. For the true and legitimate limits of deference towards any person do not extend further than to know their manners in such a way that one can associate with them without offense, and, if necessary, assist them with counsel, and meanwhile for ourselves in
                                 C                      omni-

--- Page 52 ---
30      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
...; but to pry into the affections of others, with the aim of bending him, turning him, and leading him around at will, is characteristic of a person not very candid, but rather astute and two-faced; that which would be vicious in friendship would also be improper towards Princes. For the custom of the East, by which it is considered impious to fix one's eyes on Kings, is indeed barbarous in rite, but good in its meaning: for it is not fitting for subjects to pry too curiously into the hearts of their Kings, which the Sacred Scriptures teach are inscrutable.
      There remains yet another vice (with which I shall conclude this part), often imputed to learned men, namely that in small and external matters (in countenance, gesture, gait, daily conversations, and suchlike) they fail in observing decorum; whence inexperienced men, from these minute and trivial errors, form a conjecture as to how capable they are in handling greater matters. But such a judgment usually deceives them; indeed, let them know that Themistocles' answer applies to them. For when he had been asked to play the lyre,
> he replied, arrogantly enough about himself, but very aptly for the present purpose: *That he was indeed unskilled in playing the lyre, but knew well how a small town could become a great city.* And there are, beyond doubt, many who are exceedingly skilled in political arts, yet in common life and daily

--- Page 53 ---
L I B E R I. 31
daily trifles, nothing more unskillful. Indeed,
such detractors should be sent to Plato’s Eulogy
concerning his teacher Socrates, whom he said was not unlike
apothecaries’ boxes, which on the outside were adorned
with apes, owls, and satyrs, but inside truly
contained precious liquids and noble medicines:
Acknowledging, of course, that for the common people’s understanding
and popular fame, he preferred some trivial, and even unseemly, things,
while nevertheless the inner parts of his mind were filled
with the highest faculties as well as virtues.
And concerning the manners of learned men, this much for now.
   Meanwhile, it pleases us to warn that we are doing nothing less
than to defend certain abject and sordid practices
of professors, by which they have disgraced both themselves
and letters: such were, among the Romans in later
centuries, certain philosophers in the families
of the rich, and hangers-on at their tables, whom you might
not absurdly call *Bearded Parasites*. Lucian
wittily describes one of this kind, whom a noble matron
wanted to carry her Maltese puppy in her carriage:
and when he did this dutifully, but indecently, a boy
scoffed, “*I fear our philosopher will turn from a Stoic
into a Cynic*.” But above all, nothing has so harmed
the dignity of letters as gross and base flattery,
to which many, and these not unlearned, have subjected
               C 2               both their pens and their talents,

--- Page 54 ---
32      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
submitted, *Hecuba into Helen, Faustina*
*into Lucretia*, (as Du Bartas says) transfor-
ming. Nor indeed do I overly praise that adopted custom
of dedicating books to patrons;
since books, especially those worthy of this name,
should owe themselves only to the patronage of truth and reason.
The ancients did better, who were accustomed to dedicate
their writings to none other than friends and equals,
or even to impose the names of such friends on their treatises:
but if perchance they dedicated a work to Kings or magnates,
then indeed this was done when the subject matter of the book
suited such a person. These things, moreover, and similar ones,
rather deserve reprehension than defense.
    Nor do I say this as if I blame learned men,
if they sometimes apply themselves to wealthy and powerful men:
for Diogenes rightly, to someone who with mockery asked,
*How does it happen that philosophers*
*seek out the rich, and not the rich philosophers?*
replied, not without a bite, *This happens because*
*philosophers understand well what things they need, the rich*
*do not.* Akin to this is that saying of Aristippus,
to whom, when he was asking for something or other,
and Dionysius was not paying attention, he, in the manner of one adoring,
threw himself at his feet; who then finally listening,
assented to the petition: But a little later, a certain assertor
of the dignity of philosophy rebuked Aristippus, because by lowering
himself to the feet of the Tyrant for such a small thing, philosophy

--- Page 55 ---
L I B E R I. 33
philosophy itself with insult: to whom he replied, "That it was not his fault, but Dionysius's, who carried ears in his feet." Indeed, that prudent man was not considered faint-hearted, who in a certain discussion with Hadrian Caesar allowed himself to be defeated, excusing the deed (by saying), "That it was fair to yield to him who commanded thirty Legions." And therefore, learned men are not to be condemned when, as the situation demands, they relax something of their dignity, whether compelled by necessity or prompted by opportunity; which, although it may seem humble and servile at first glance, nevertheless, to one more truly judging the matter, they will be judged not to serve the person, but the time itself.

Let us proceed now to the errors and vanities which intervene and mix themselves in the very studies of learned men; this especially and properly pertains to the present argument. In this matter, it is not our purpose to champion the errors themselves, but through their censure and separation, to shake out what is sound and solid, and to vindicate it from calumny. For we see that it is customary, especially among the envious, because of those things which are depraved, also to disparage those things which are uncorrupted and have remained in their proper state; just as the Heathens in the primitive Church used to bespatter Christians with the vices of heretics. Nor is it my intention, however, to institute some more accurate examination concerning the errors, and

C 3 impe-

--- Page 56 ---
34      Oɴ ᴛʜᴇ Aᴅᴠᴀɴᴄᴇᴍᴇɴᴛ ᴏғ Lᴇᴀʀɴɪɴɢ.
impediments of literature, which are more internal, and more remote from the grasp of the common people; but to speak only of those things, which fall under common, and popular observation, and are noted, or at least do not recede far from it.
    Wherefore I especially detect three vain and empty things in literature, which have particularly furnished opportunities for detraction. For we consider those things vain which are either false or frivolous; in which, namely, either truth is lacking, or utility: We also consider those men vain and frivolous, who are either credulous towards falsehoods, or curious in matters of little use. Curiosity, however, is either concerned with things themselves, or with words; when, indeed, either labor is expended on vain matters, or too much effort is put into verbal niceties. Wherefore, it seems consistent not only with certain experience, but also with right reason, that three intemperances of doctrines be posited. The first is fantastic doctrine, the second litigious doctrine, the third artificial and soft doctrine: or thus; vain imaginations, vain altercations, vain affectations. And indeed I shall begin with the last.
    This intemperance, situated in a certain luxuriance of speech, (although it was once alternately held in esteem) remarkably prevailed around the time of Luther. The main reason was that the fervor and efficacy of preaching at that time, for soothing and attract-
                                                                    -ing

--- Page 57 ---
LIBER I. 35
while it was most flourishing: But those demanded a popular
kind of speech. There was added
hatred and contempt, arisen at those very times, towards the Scholastics, who used a very different
style and manner of writing, forging words very freely, new
and harsh, little concerned about the ornament and elegance of speech, provided that they avoided circumlocution,
and expressed their meanings and concepts acutely; and hence it happened that
a little later, among many, a greater
care for words than for things began to be held; most
people desiring a more adorned phrase, a smooth
period, the rhythms of clauses, the little
stars of tropes; rather than the weight of things, the sinews of arguments, the sharpness of invention, or the file of judgment. Then indeed flourished
the luxuriant and diluted speech of Osorio, the Lusitanian Bishop. Then Sturm
spent endless and painstaking effort on Cicero the Orator
and Hermogenes the Rhetorician. Then Carr and
Ascam among us, by their lectures and writings, exalting Cicero and Demosthenes to the sky,
invited young men to this polished
and flourishing kind of learning. Then Erasmus seized the opportunity to introduce
that ridiculous Echo, *“I have spent ten years reading Cicero”*: to which Echo replied,
*“one, ass”*. But the doctrine of the Scholastics began to be held in utter
contempt, as rough and barbarous: Finally, to say it once, the prin-
C 4 cipal

--- Page 58 ---
36      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
chief inclination and study of those times
turned rather to Copiousness than to weight.
   Here therefore is to be seen the first intemperance of letters,
when, as we said, words are studied, not things:
of which, although I have brought forth examples only from the most recent
times, nevertheless, to a greater or lesser degree, follies
of this kind pleased in old times, and will please hereafter.
Now indeed it cannot be but that this very thing
contributes much to diminishing and debasing the estimation
of learning, even among the unlearned populace,
when they see the writings of the learned, like the
initial letter of a charter, which, although it be varied
with diverse strokes of the pen and flourishes, is nevertheless a single letter. And
to me indeed seems very apt an adumbration
of this vanity, and as it were an Emblem, that
madness of Pygmalion: for what else are words,
than images of things, so that unless they are animated
by the vigor of reason, to love them is the same
as to dote upon a statue?
   Nor, however, is it rashly to be condemned, if
anyone illuminates and polishes the obscure and rough
parts of philosophy with the splendor of words: For
of this thing there are great examples in Xenophon,
Cicero, Seneca, Plutarch, and even Plato himself:
nor is the utility less. For although this thing
somewhat impedes a diligent knowledge of truth,
and an eager study of philosophy, because too hastily
                                                              men-

--- Page 59 ---
LIBER I. 37
lulls the mind to sleep, and quenches the thirst and ardor for further inquiry; if anyone, however, applies learning to civil uses (namely, of conversing, consulting, persuading, arguing, and similar things), he will find all things he desires prepared and furnished in such authors. Nevertheless, the excess of this matter is so justly despised, that just as Hercules, when he saw a statue of Adonis (the darling of Venus) in the temple, indignantly said, "You are nothing sacred"; so all Herculean champions of letters, that is, laborious and constant investigators of truth, would easily despise such delights and luxuries, as if breathing nothing divine.

A somewhat sounder kind of style exists, yet not entirely devoid of vanity itself, which almost immediately succeeds that abundance and luxury of speech in time. It consists entirely in this: that the words be pointed, the sentences concise, and the speech, in short, rather crafted than diffused; hence it happens that all things, through such artifice, seem more ingenious than they really are. Such a style is found more profusely in Seneca, more moderately in Tacitus and Pliny the Younger; and recently began to be suited to the ears of our time. But this very thing is usually pleasing to mediocre intellects, so much so that it procures a certain dignity for letters; nevertheless, it is deservedly disdained by more refined judgments, and can be considered a kind of intemperance

C 5
of learning,

--- Page 60 ---
38      ON THE AUGMENTATION OF SCIENCES.
of doctrine, since it is also a kind of pursuit of words and their elegance. And let these things be said concerning the first literary intemperance.

There follows that intemperance in the subject matter itself, which we placed in the middle, and designated by the name of _contentious subtlety_. And that one is somewhat worse than the one about which we just spoke. For just as the dignity of subject matter excels the elegance of words, so on the contrary, vanity is more hateful in things than in words. In this regard, that Pauline rebuke can be referred no more to his own age than it can be extended to subsequent times; and it seems to regard not only Theology, but also all sciences. _Avoid profane novelties of words, and oppositions of falsely named knowledge._ For by these words he proposes two signs and indications of suspected and counterfeit knowledge. The first is, novelty and unusualness of words; The second, the rigidity of dogmas, which necessarily introduces opposition, and then altercations and questions. Certainly, just as many natural bodies, while they are whole and strong, are often corrupted and turn into worms, in the same way sound and solid knowledge of things very often putrefies and dissolves into subtle, vain, unhealthy, and (if I may so speak) worm-eaten questions; which seem to be endowed with a certain movement and some vivacity, but they are rotten and of no use. This kind of doctrine, being less sound and corrupting itself,

--- Page 61 ---
L I B E R I. 39
ting itself, prevailed especially among many of the Scholastics, who, abounding in extreme leisure and sharp in intellect, but deficient in reading (since their minds were confined within the writings of a few authors, especially Aristotle their dictator, no less than their bodies in the cells of monasteries), and for the most part ignorant of the history of both nature and time; from a not great warp of matter, but by a very great agitation of spirit, as if of rays, they wove the most elaborate webs, which are extant in their books. For, the human mind, if it acts upon matter, contemplating the nature of things and the works of God, operates according to the measure of the matter, and is determined by it; but if it turns in upon itself (like a spider weaving a web), then at last it is boundless, and certainly produces certain webs of doctrine, admirable in the fineness of their thread and workmanship, but as to use, frivolous and empty.

This useless subtlety or curiosity is twofold: and is observed either in the matter itself: such as vain speculation, or controversy, of which kind not a few are found both in Theology and in Philosophy: or in the manner and method of treating [a subject]; this among the Scholastics was generally of this kind. Upon every proposed subject they formed objections; then the solutions to those objections, which solutions for the most part were merely distinctions, whereas nevertheless the strength of all sciences, like that bundle
C 6 illius

--- Page 62 ---
40      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
that old man, does not consist in individual sticks, but in all of
them joined together by a bond. For
indeed, the symmetry of knowledge, namely its individual parts
supporting each other, is, and ought to be,
a true and ready method of refuting
the objections of lesser minds: On the contrary, if
you extract individual axioms, like the sticks of a bundle,
separately, it will be easy to weaken them,
and at will, either bend or break them:
just as what was said of Seneca, "*he breaks the weight of things with the minutiae of words*;*"
can truly be applied to the scholastics, "*they break the strength of sciences with the minutiae of questions*." Would it not
be more advisable in a spacious hall to light one
candle, or hang a lampstand
equipped with various lights, by which all things
might be illuminated at once, than to carry around a small
lamp in every direction to individual spots?
And yet, not dissimilar is the reasoning of those
who do not so much strive to illustrate truth with clear arguments,
authorities, and examples; as they solely focus on
removing every minute scruple, and resolving
captious objections, and solving doubts;
in this way generating question after
question; just as happens in the
aforementioned simile, when a lamp carried to one
particular spot, leaves others all around
destitute and obscures them. So much so that the fable of Scylla
vividly expresses this kind of
philosophy; whose mouth and breast are a beautiful
maiden

--- Page 63 ---
L I B E R I. 41
presented a beautiful form, but below, they say, it was
   *Girt about her white loins with barking*
      *monsters.*
Thus you will find certain generalities among the Scholastics, which are beautiful to speak of, and not wrongly discovered; but when it comes to distinctions and decisions, instead of a fertile womb for the advantages of human life, they end in monstrous and barking questions. Therefore, it is not at all surprising if this kind of doctrine has been subject to contempt even among the common people, who usually scorn truth because of the controversies raised about it, and think that all those err who never agree among themselves; and when they see learned men fighting among themselves about matters of no importance, they readily seize upon that saying of Dionysius of Syracuse, *These are the words*
*of idle old men.* Nevertheless, it is most certain that if only the Scholastics had added variety and multiplicity of reading and contemplation to their insatiable thirst for truth and continuous stirring of the intellect, they would indeed have been outstanding lights, and would have wonderfully advanced all arts and sciences.
So much for the second intemperance of letters.
   As for the third, which pertains to falsehood and deceit; this one is the most disgraceful of all, since it destroys the very nature and soul of knowledge; which
                                                               nihil

--- Page 64 ---
42      Dᴇ Aᴜɢᴍ. Sᴄɪᴇɴᴛ.
which is nothing else than the image of truth. For
the truth of being, and the truth of knowing, are the same;
nor do they differ more from each other than
a direct ray and a reflected ray. This vice, there-
fore, is twofold, or rather duplicated: im-
posture and credulity; the latter is deceived, the former
deceives. Although these may seem to be of differing
natures, one proceeding from a certain cunning,
the other proceeding from simplicity, nevertheless they often
coincide. For as it is said in the verse,
   *Shun the inquisitive person; for he is also a babbler.*
implying that he who is curious is also
frivolous: similarly it happens that he who easily believes, also
willingly deceives. Just as we also see it happen
in reputation, in rumors; that he who quickly gives
credit to them, with equal ease amplifies them.
which Tacitus wisely hints at with these
words, *they invent at the same time, and believe.* so close
are the will to deceive, and the readiness to believe.
   This readiness to believe and accept everything (though
supported by slight authority) is of two kinds
according to the nature of the subject matter: for either
belief is given to a narration, or to a fact, (as
the Jurists speak) or to a dogma. In the former
kind, we see with how much detriment to dignity
this error has affected some Ecclesiastical histories;
which showed themselves too ready, in reporting and
transcribing miracles, by martyrs, her-
                                                            mits,

--- Page 65 ---
L I B E R I. 43
hermits, anchorites, and other holy men, and published from their relics, tombs, chapels, and images. In the same way, in natural history, we see many things rashly, and with little selection or judgment, received and described; as is clear from the writings of Pliny, Cardano, Albert, and very many of the Arabs, which everywhere abound with fictitious and fabulous narratives, and these not only uncertain and by no means proven, but clearly false and manifestly refuted: to the great disgrace of natural philosophy, among serious and sober men. In this, indeed, shines forth Aristotle's wisdom and integrity; who, although he wrote a diligent and accurate history of animals, so sparingly mixed in fictitious or fabulous things: but rather, he collected admirable reports, which he judged worthy of mention, into a single small commentary: wisely considering that clearly true things (which, as a solid basis of experience, can be laid beneath philosophy and sciences) ought not rashly to be mixed with things of suspected credibility: and again, also rare and unusual things, which seem incredible to most, ought not to be entirely suppressed, nor denied to the memory of posterity.

But that other credulity, which is attributed not to history or narratives, but to arts and opinions, is twofold: either with the arts themselves, or with authors in the art, too much belief—

--- Page 66 ---
44      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
we believe. The arts themselves, which have more from imagination and faith than from reason and demonstrations, are principally three: Astrology, Natural Magic, and Alchemy; whose ends, however, are not ignoble. For Astrology professes to reveal the influence and dominion of superior things over inferior things. Magic aims to recall Natural Philosophy from the variety of speculations to the greatness of works. Alchemy undertakes to separate and extract the heterogeneous parts of things which lie hidden and are entangled in natural bodies; and to purify the defiled bodies themselves, to free the impeded, to perfect the immature. But the ways and methods which are thought to lead to these ends, both in the theory of those arts and in practice, are full of error and trifles. Nor indeed is their tradition, for the most part, straightforward, but riddled with artifices and concealments. To Alchemy, however, this certainly is owed, that it can truly be compared to the farmer in Aesop,

--- Page 67 ---
L I B E R I.        45-
of the mind, then for restoring nature, then for the uses of life exceedingly suitable, as if they lit a torch.
   That credulity, however, which fortified certain authors of sciences with a certain dictatorial power, so that they might decree, not as senators to consult, inflicted immense damage on the sciences, as the principal cause which so greatly afflicted and depressed them, that without any significant augmentation they lay lifeless. Hence indeed it happened that in the Mechanical arts, the first inventors devised few things, while time supplied and perfected the rest; but in the sciences, the first authors penetrated very far, while time wore away and corrupted many things. Thus we see Gunnery, Navigation, and Typography to have been imperfect and almost formless at their beginnings, and burdensome to those practicing them, but by the progress of time, refined and suitable. But on the contrary, the philosophies and sciences of Aristotle, Plato, Democritus, Hippocrates, Euclid, and Archimedes flourished in those very authors, but rather degenerated with the passage of time, and lost no small part of their splendor: Of which matter there is no other reason than that in the Mechanical arts, the talents of many converged into one, [whereas] in the liberal arts and sciences, the talents of many succumbed under one; whom, however, his own followers very often rather corrupted than illuminated.

--- Page 68 ---
46 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
For just as water will not rise higher than the source from which it flows; so doctrine derived from Aristotle will never rise above the doctrine of Aristotle. And therefore, although the rule, "the learner must believe," is not displeasing; yet to this must be joined, "*the one already taught must use his own judgment.*" For disciples owe to their Masters only temporary faith and suspension of judgment, until they have thoroughly imbibed the arts, but not a full renunciation of liberty and perpetual servitude of intellect. Wherefore, to conclude this part, I will only add this; let great authors thus retain their due honor, that the Author of authors, and Time, the parent of truth, may not be disparaged.

We have finally explained three distempers, or diseases, of learning; besides which there are some, not so much confirmed diseases, as vicious humors: which, however, are not so obscure or hidden, but that they fall under the notice and censure of many, and therefore are by no means to be omitted.

The first of these is the immoderate study of two extremes, antiquity and novelty. In which matter the daughters of time badly imitate their father: for just as time devours its offspring, so do these (devour) each other; while antiquity envies new advancements, and novelty is not content to add recent things, unless it utterly eliminates and rejects the old. Certainly the counsel of the Prophet true in

--- Page 69 ---
LIBER I.                     47
the true counsel of the Prophet in this matter is: _Stand ye in the old ways, and see which is the straight and good way, and walk therein._ Antiquity deserves such reverence that men should for a while stop their step, and stand upon it, and look around everywhere to see what is the best way: but when the way has been well established, then at last one must not hesitate, but proceed eagerly. Indeed, to speak the truth, _Antiquity of the age, youth of the world._ Our times are truly the ancient times, since the world has now grown old, not those which are reckoned in retrograde order, taking their beginning from our age.

  Another error arising from the former is a certain suspicion and distrust, which supposes that nothing can now be discovered which the world could have lacked for so long: as if that objection were applicable to time, by which Lucian assails Jupiter and the other pagan gods: For he wonders, _why they begot so many children in the past, but none now_

--- Page 70 ---
48      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
It had not been. Thus Alexander's expedition into Asia was considered at first as a vast and very difficult undertaking; yet afterwards it pleased Livy to elevate it so much that he said of Alexander, *'He dared nothing else than to bravely scorn vain things.'* The same happened to Columbus concerning the Western navigation. But in intellectual matters, this happens much more frequently; as can be seen in most propositions in Euclid: which before they are demonstrated, seem wonderful, and to which one would not easily assent; but after the demonstration has been made, the mind grasps them by a kind of 'retraction' (as jurists speak), as if previously seen and known.

Another error akin to the previous one, is that of those who think that of all ancient sects and heresies, after they had been examined and sifted, the best always prevailed, with others being set aside. Therefore they think that if someone were to institute an inquiry and examination anew, he could not but fall upon some of the rejected opinions, and those lost and obliterated after their rejection: as if indeed the multitude, or even the wise for the sake of deluding the multitude, have not often approved that which is more popular and superficial, rather than that which is solid and deeply rooted. For time indeed is like a river, which carries down to us light and inflated things, but submerges solid and weighty things.

--- Page 71 ---
LIBER I. 49

Another error, different from the rest, is the premature and presumptuous reduction of doctrines into arts and methods; which being the case, science for the most part profits either little or nothing. Indeed, just as youths, after the limbs and features of their bodies are perfectly formed, scarcely grow any more: so science, as long as it is scattered in Aphorisms and observations, can grow and rise, but once circumscribed and concluded by methods, it can perhaps be polished and illustrated, or fashioned for human uses, but not further increased in bulk.

Another error succeeding the one we last noted, is that after individual sciences and arts have been distributed into their classes, universal knowledge of things and First Philosophy are soon renounced by most; which is indeed most hostile to the progress of doctrines. Views are made from towers, or very high places: and it is impossible for anyone to explore the more remote and inner parts of any science, if he stands on the plain of that same science, and does not ascend, as it were, to a watchtower of a higher science.

Another error flows from an excessive reverence and, as it were, adoration of the human intellect: whence men have withdrawn themselves from the contemplation of nature and from experience, wallowing up and down in their own meditations and fancies of the mind. But these renowned theorists

--- Page 72 ---
50      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
But these excellent theorists, and (if I may so speak) Intellectualists, who are nevertheless usually considered the most sublime and divine philosophers, Heraclitus rightly criticized. "Men," he said, "seek truth in their own Microcosms, not in the greater world." For they reject, as it were, the ABC of nature and the first apprenticeship in divine works; which if they did not do, they might perhaps gradually and slowly, after simple letters, and then syllables, ascend to readily reading the very text and volume of creatures. But they, on the contrary, by constant agitation of mind, urge and as it were invoke their Geniuses, that they may prophesy to them and utter oracles, by which they are deservedly and pleasantly deceived.

    Another error, akin to this latter one, is that men too often imbue and infect their meditations and doctrines with certain opinions and their own concepts, which they especially hold in admiration; or with arts to which they are most addicted and consecrated, infecting and as it were tinging all other things with these delights, though with a very deceptive dye. Thus Plato mixed Theology into his Philosophy, Aristotle Logic, the second School of Plato (Proclus, namely, and the rest) Mathematics. For they were accustomed to caress these arts as their first-born sons. But the Chemists, from a few experiments at the hearth and furnace, a new Philo-
                                sophy

--- Page 73 ---
BOOK I. 51

philosophy they hammered out. And Gilbert, our countryman, drew out another philosophy from the Magnet. Thus Cicero, when reviewing various opinions about the nature of the soul, had at last come upon a Musician who maintained that the soul was Harmony, wittily said, "*this man did not depart from his art.*" But concerning this kind of errors, Aristotle aptly and prudently says, "*Those who look to few things, pronounce easily.*"

Another error is the impatience of doubting, and a blind haste in deciding, without a due and [small red mark] mature suspension of judgment. For the crossroads of contemplation is not unlike the crossroads of action, often mentioned by the ancients: of which one path was at first smooth and easy, but at the end impassable; the other was rough and rugged to the one entering, but when you had proceeded a little, it was clear and level. No differently in contemplations, if one begins from certainties, he will end in uncertainties; but if he begins from doubts, and patiently endures them for a while, he will find an outcome in certainties.

A similar error shows itself in the method of transmitting doctrine, which, for the most part, is imperious and magisterial, not open and liberal, so composed in the end that it rather commands belief than submits itself to examination. I would not deny that in summary treatises, destined for practice, this form of writing can be retained; but in proper treatises on the sciences I consider both extremes to be avoided: both that of Velleius the Epicurean, fearing nothing so much as lest

--- Page 74 ---
52 Dᴇ Aᴜɢᴍ. Sᴄɪᴇɴᴛ.
...lest he should seem to doubt about anything: than that of Socrates and the Academy, who left everything in doubt. Rather, one should strive for candor, and things should be delivered with greater or lesser assertiveness, according as they have been proven more sparingly or more fully by the weight of reasons.

	Other errors are in the aims which men set for themselves, and towards which they direct their efforts and labors. For while the more diligent leaders of letters ought especially to aim at this, that they may add something excellent to the art which they profess: these (others), on the contrary, are content merely to stand in secondary roles, seeking the name either of a subtle interpreter, or of a vehement and vigorous antagonist, or of a methodical abbreviator: whence the revenues and income of the sciences can be increased, but the patrimony and capital by no means.

	But the gravest error of all consists in the deviation from the ultimate end of doctrines. For men desire knowledge, some from an innate and restless curiosity: others for the sake of amusement, and delight: others for the sake of reputation: others for the sake of contention, and that they may be superior in disputation: most because of gain and livelihood: very few, that they may employ the gift of reason, divinely given, for the uses of the human race. Clearly, as if in doctrine one sought a couch, in which a restless and fervent intellect might repose: or a Xystus or Portico, in which the mind might freely wander.

--- Page 75 ---
L I B E R I. 53
free, and wandering: or a high and lofty Tower, from which an ambitious and proud mind might look down: or a fortress and bulwark for contentions and battles: or a workshop for gain, and trade: And not rather a rich storehouse, and Treasury, for the glory of the maker of all things, and the relief of human life. For this is what would truly adorn and elevate learning and the arts, if contemplation and action were joined by a closer bond than hitherto. And certainly such a conjunction would be like the Syzygy of the two supreme Planets, when Saturn, the Leader of quiet and contemplation, conspires with Jupiter, the Leader of Society and action. Although when I speak of practice and action, I by no means allude to professional and lucrative learning. For it does not escape me how much this very thing hinders the progress and amplification of learning. Just as indeed, a golden apple, thrown before the eyes of Atalanta, which while she bends to pick it up, her course is meanwhile impeded.
      *She diverts her course, and picks up the rolling*
            *gold.*
   Nor again is it my intention, what was said of Socrates, *to call Philosophy down from heaven, so that it might only dwell on earth;* that is, to set aside Physics, so that Moral Philosophy and Politics alone might be celebrated: but just as heaven and earth together con-
                                 D               spire,

--- Page 76 ---
54      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
conspire, and consent, to protect and aid human life; so indeed this should be the purpose of both philosophies, that, with vain speculations rejected, and whatever is empty and sterile, whatever is solid and fruitful may be preserved; so that in this way, knowledge may not be like a harlot for pleasure, or like a handmaid for gain; but like a spouse, for generation, fruit, and honest solace.

Now I seem to have explained, and as it were, opened up with a kind of dissection, those vicious humors, or at least their principal ones, which not only hindered the progress of letters, but also gave occasion for blaming them. If indeed I have done this too much to the quick, it is necessary to remember, *Faithful are the wounds of a lover, but deceitful* *the kisses of a malicious one.* However this may be, I certainly seem to have achieved this, that I may merit trust in the following commendation, since I have acted so freely in the preceding censure. Nor is it my intention, however, to write a panegyric of letters, or to sing a hymn to the Muses, although perhaps it has been a long time since their sacred rites were duly celebrated: but the plan is, without embellishments and hyperboles, to take up and weigh the true importance of doctrine against other things, and to seek out its true value and price from divine and human testimonies.

First therefore let us seek the dignity of knowledge

--- Page 77 ---
L I B E R I. 55
of knowledge in its archetype or exemplar: that is, in
the attributes and acts of God, inasmuch as they are reve-
aled to man and can be soberly investigated.
In this regard, the appellation of doctrine is not fitting,
since all doctrine is acquired knowledge; but no knowledge
in God is acquired, but original. Therefore, another name
must be sought, namely *Wisdom*, as the sacred scri-
ptures designate it.

But the case is as follows: In the works of crea-
tion, we see a twofold emanation of divine power,
of which one refers to power, the other to wisdom:
The former is especially discerned in creating the mass
of matter, the latter in arranging the beauty of form.
This being established, it must be noted that nothing in the history
of creation prevents that confused mass of heaven and earth,
and matter, from having been created in a single moment of
time; to which, however, six days were attributed for its
arrangement and ordering: so significantly did God
distinguish the works of power and wisdom. Moreover,
concerning the creation of matter, it is not recorded
that God said, *let heaven and earth be made*, as was
said concerning the subsequent works; but plainly and
actually, *God created heaven and earth*: so that matter
appears as if made by hand; but the introduction of form
has the style of law, or decree.
Let us proceed from God to the angels, whose na-
ture, by dignity, is closest to God. We see,
D 2 in

--- Page 78 ---
56 Dᴇ Aᴜɢᴍ. Sᴄɪᴇɴᴛ.
in the orders of Angels (insofar as faith is to be
given to that celestial Hierarchy which is
published under the name of Dionysius the Areopagite) the first
place is held by *Seraphim*, namely Angels
of love; the second by *Cherubim*, Angels of
illumination: but the third place, and the subsequent
ones, are granted to *Thrones*, *Principalities*, and the other
Angels of power and ministry: so that from
this very order and distribution it may be clear that
Angels of knowledge and illumination are preferred to angels
of dominion and power.
     Descending from spirits and intelligences to sensible
and material forms, we read that the first
of created forms was light; which in natural
and corporeal things corresponds to knowledge
in spiritual and incorporeal things.
     Thus in the distribution of days, we see that the day
on which God rested and contemplated His
works, was blessed above all the
days on which the fabric of the universe was created and arranged.
     After creation was completed, we read that
man was placed in Paradise, to work there:
which work indeed could be nothing other
than that which pertains to contemplation;
that is, whose end could be referred not to any
necessity, but to delight, and activity
without toil. For since at that time
there could be no resistance from creation,
no sweat of the brow, it necessarily follows,

--- Page 79 ---
**BOOK I. 57**
...necessarily follows that human actions were intended for pleasure and contemplation, not for labor or work. Furthermore, the first actions of man, which he exercised in Paradise, embraced two summary parts of knowledge: these were, the inspection of creatures, and the imposition of names. For that knowledge which introduced the fall (which we also previously noted) was not natural science concerning creatures, but moral science concerning good and evil; from this supposition, that God's commands, or prohibitions, were not the principles of good and evil, but that they had other origins; the knowledge of which man sought, namely, that he might totally defect from God, and rely entirely on himself and his own will.

Let us come to those things which happened immediately after the fall. We see (as there are innumerable Mysteries of the sacred scriptures, always preserving historical and literal truth) the image of two lives, namely contemplative and active, delineated in the persons of Abel and Cain, and in their institutions, and primitive ways of living: of whom one was a Shepherd (who, because of leisure and quiet, and a free view of the sky, is a type of the Theoretical life) the other an agriculturist (wearied, namely, by labors, with his gaze fixed on the earth.) Where it is to be observed that divine favor and election came to the shepherd, not to the farmer.

Thus before the flood, the sacred annals, among the very few things,

--- Page 80 ---
L I B E R I. 58
very few names of men, Enoch, &
Noah, they commemorate: of whom the one, (who
was raptured) is a type of the contemplative life;
the other, (who was saved) is a type of the active life.
But & in the deluge itself, when all human works
and all cultivation of the earth perished,
Noah's ark, (which is a type of the Church) in
the midst of the waters, rested upon the surface of the earth,
and in it, all knowledge, and all
contemplation, was preserved. After the deluge
however, when again men, to works
& labo(u)r, had been recalled, & in that
life, which is on earth, knowledge, & con-
templation, were as if foreign, &
exiles: yet God, to Moses, to
the priest, always, you are, knowledge.
of knowledge. And in this very thing, that Moses
Let us survey. For if anyone, through all
you are, and we shall find. For if anyone, through all
sacred writings, diligently scrutinizes,
uses, sacred, most learned-
men, & most wise, men, to sacred
priesthoods, & to divine worship, themselves
to have applied, diligently. And in this very thing, that
sometimes God, to Kings, & to others
sense. But if anyone, through all sacred
dis-
*& to knowledge, & to contemplation,*
called, it was not, that them, from sacred
of the priest. & this very thing, that God, to

--- Page 81 ---
LIBER I. 59
*will be separated from three. From this law, one of them gathers an axiom in nature: that putrefaction is more pestilential before, than after maturity. Another elicits a moral lesson: that men covered everywhere with disgraces corrupt public morals less than those moderately and only partly bad: so much so that from this, and similar passages of that law, besides the theological sense, not a few things pertaining to philosophy seem to be disseminated.*

If anyone also diligently examines that excellent book of Job, he will find it full, and as it were pregnant, with the mysteries of natural philosophy. For example, concerning Cosmography, and the rotundity of the earth, in that passage, *Who stretches out the North over the void, and hangs the earth upon nothing.* Where the suspended earth, the Arctic pole, and the convexity of the heavens in their outermost parts, are not obscurely hinted at. Again, concerning Astronomy, and the constellations, with these words, *His spirit has adorned the heavens, and by his guiding hand the crooked serpent was brought forth.* And in another place, *Canst thou bind the glittering stars of the Pleiades, or canst thou loose the bands of Arcturus?* where the unmoving configuration of the fixed stars, always distant from each other by equal intervals, is most elegantly described. The same in another place, *who makes Arcturus, and Orion, and the Hyades, and the Chambers of the South.* Where again he hints at the depression of the Antarctic pole, and designates it by the name

D 4

--- Page 82 ---
60      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
*of the innermost parts of the South*, because the Southern stars
are not seen in our Hemisphere. Concerning
the generation of animals: *Didst thou not pour me out as milk,*
*and curdle me like cheese?*
&c. Concerning metallic matters, *Surely there is a vein*
*for the silver, and a place for gold where they fine it:*
*iron is taken out of the earth, and*
*stone dissolved by heat is turned into bronze.* And the follow-
ing in the same chapter.
      Likewise, in the person of King Solomon, we
see the gift of wisdom, both in his own request
and in divine concession, preferred above all
goods of earthly and temporal happiness. By virtue
of which gift and concession, Solomon, excellently
instructed, not only wrote those notable Parables,
or Aphorisms, concerning divine and moral Philosophy;
but also composed a natural history
of all vegetables, *from the cedar on the mountain,*
*even unto the moss on the wall*, (which
is nothing other than the rudiment of a plant of decay
and a medium herb) and also of all things
that breathe and move. Indeed, the same
King Solomon, although he excelled in riches,
magnificence of buildings, fleet, retinue,
celebrity of name, and other things pertaining to
glory, nevertheless, from that harvest of glory,
he plucked or assumed nothing for himself, except
the honor of inquiring and discovering truth.
For thus he eloquently says; *It is the glory of God to conceal a thing,*
*and the glory of kings is to search out a matter.*
                                                                    And

--- Page 83 ---
L I B E R I. 61
And as if the divine Majesty were delighted by that harmless and benevolent game of children, who therefore hide themselves so that they may be found; and as if indeed nothing were more honorable for Kings than to be God's playmates in the same game; especially since they command so many intellects and have such great resources at hand, by which every investigation of a secret can be accomplished.
  Nor indeed did God arrange these things differently after our Savior had come into the world. For He first showed His power in overcoming ignorance, when He disputed with the doctors and priests in the Temple, rather than in subjugating nature by so many and such great miracles performed. The coming also of the Holy Spirit was especially foreshadowed and expressed in the likeness and gift of tongues, which are merely vehicles of knowledge.
  Thus, in choosing those instruments which God employed to disseminate the faith, He at first called men plainly unlearned and unlettered, except that they had been instructed by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit; by which He might more evidently declare His immediate and divine power, and depress all human wisdom. But as soon as His counsel in this part had been fulfilled, soon in the immediate subsequent periods, He sent His divine truth into the world, accompanied by other doctrines as if by handmaids.
Therefore the pen of St. Paul, (who among the Apo-
                D 5            stles

--- Page 84 ---
62 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
(Apostles was the only learned one) in the writings of the New Testament, was especially employed by God.

Thus also we know that many of the ancient Bishops and Fathers were excellently versed in all Gentile learning. So much so that Julian's edict, by which it was decreed that Christians should not be sent to Schools and Gymnasia, was considered a more pernicious device for overthrowing the Christian faith than the bloody persecutions of previous Emperors. Nor was the zeal and ill-will of Gregory I, Bishop of Rome (otherwise an excellent man), who strove to obliterate the memory of Gentile authors and antiquities, well-received, even among pious men. Moreover, the Christian Church alone, amidst the inundations of the Scythians from the northern regions and of the Saracens from the eastern ones, preserved in its bosom and lap the precious remnants of Gentile learning, which were already on the verge of utterly perishing. Recently also one can observe the Jesuits (who, partly from their own zeal, partly from rivalry with adversaries, strenuously applied themselves to letters) how much aid and strength they brought to restoring and establishing the Roman See.

Therefore, to conclude this part, there are two principal duties and services, besides ornament and illustration, which humane letters render to faith and religion. One,
which

--- Page 85 ---
L I B E R I. 63
that they are effective incitements for exalting
and celebrating divine glory; for just as the
Psalms and other scriptures frequently invite us
to the contemplation and proclamation of the
magnificent and admirable works of God;
so, if we were to cling only to their external appearance,
as they present themselves to our senses, we would
do the same injury to the divine Majesty, as if
we were to judge concerning the opulence and abundance
of a most noble Jeweler, from those things which
are openly displayed in the shop window.

The second, that Philosophy offers a singular remedy
and antidote against infidelity and errors. For our
Savior says, *'You err, not knowing the scriptures and the power*
*of God.'* Where He proposes two books for us to study,
lest we fall into errors: first the volume of the scriptures,
which reveal the will of God, then the volume of creatures,
which reveal His power: Of which the latter is, as it were,
the key to the former, not only opening our understanding
to the genuine meaning of the scriptures, to be drawn out
from the general rules of reason and the laws of discourse;
But furthermore, and especially, unlocking our faith, so that
we may enter into a serious meditation on divine omnipotence,
whose characters are most deeply inscribed and carved into
His works. So much be said concerning divine testimonies
and judgments, for the true dignity and value of doctrine.
                D 6

--- Page 86 ---
64          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
As for human testimonies and arguments, so wide a field is opened that in this brief and concise treatise, it is more fitting to employ selection rather than abundance. First, therefore, the highest degree of honor among the Heathens was to achieve divine veneration and worship: (Which indeed for Christians is as a forbidden fruit:) But now we speak separately of human judgments. Therefore (as we began to say) among the Heathens, that which the Greeks called *Apotheosis*, the Latins *Enrollment among the Gods*, was the supreme honor that could be bestowed by man upon man: especially when it was not conferred by any decree or edict of the empire (as for the Caesars among the Romans), but was spontaneously bestowed from the opinion of men and internal faith. Of such an exalted honor, there was a certain degree and an intermediate stage. Indeed, above human honors, heroic and divine honors were reckoned. In their distribution, the ancients observed this order. Founders of commonwealths, Legislators, Tyrannicides; Fathers of the Fatherland, and those who deserved best in civil affairs, were distinguished by the title of Heroes only, or Demigods, such as *Theseus, Minos, Romulus*, and others: On the other hand, inventors and authors of new arts, and those who endowed human life with new conveniences and additions, were always consecrated among the greater Gods themselves; which to *Ceres, Bacchus, Mercury, Apollo*, and others was con-

--- Page 87 ---
L I B E R I. 65
happened. Which certainly was done with right and sound
judgment. For the merits of the former
are almost confined within the limits of one age or nation;
nor are they unlike timely and benevolent rains, which, although
they are fruitful and desirable, are nevertheless useful only for that
season in which they fall, and for the extent of the tract of land
which they irrigate. But the benefits of the latter, like
the gifts of the sun itself and of the heavens, are perpetual in
time, and infinite in place. Those again,
are for the most part connected with strife and disturbance;
these have the true character of divine presence, and
come in a gentle breeze, without tumult or
noise.
   Nor indeed does the merit of learning in civil
affairs, and in repressing the harms which man
inflicts upon man, yield much to that other, in
relieving human necessities which are imposed by
nature itself. And this kind of
merit was excellently shadowed forth under that fictional
narrative, concerning the Theater of Orpheus; where individual
beasts and birds were gathered, who, forgetful
of their innate appetites, of prey, games, and fighting,
stood together amicably and peacefully, captivated by the
harmony and sweetness of the Lyre. Whose sound,
when it either ceased or was overwhelmed by a greater
noise, all living creatures immediately returned to their nature.
In which fable are elegantly described the dispositions and customs
of men,

--- Page 88 ---
66 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
...natures and customs of men, who are driven by various and untamed desires, of gain, lust, revenge: who nevertheless, as long as they lend an ear to the precepts and persuasions of religion, laws, Magistrates, eloquently and sweetly expressed in books, speeches, and sermons, so long do they cultivate peace and society; but if these fall silent, or seditions and tumults clamor, all things fall apart, and relapse into anarchy and confusion.

But indeed this is seen more clearly when Kings themselves, or Magnates, or Governors are endowed with learning. For however much he may seem too devoted to his own party, who said, *then at last will states be happy, when either philosophers rule, or kings philosophize*; this, however, is known by experience, that under learned Princes and guardians of the State, ages have been most happy. For although Kings themselves have their own errors and vices,

--- Page 89 ---
LIBER I. 67
foreseeing dangers and repelling them early, whereas these (others) are wise only when things are close at hand and immediate, seeing nothing unless it is imminent, and then finally, trusting in the agility of their own intellect, they are confident that they can extricate and rescue themselves at the very moment of danger.
   This happiness of times under learned Princes (as I always strive for brevity, using only the most select and most illustrious examples) is especially seen in that age which flowed from the death of Emperor Domitian up to the reign of Commodus; embracing a succession of learned princes, or certainly those intensely favoring learning; and (which was) by far the most flourishing of all (ages), if we consider temporal goods, that Rome, then the epitome of the whole world, ever saw. This had been foretold to Domitian in a dream, on the day before he was killed. For he seemed to see that *a golden head had grown for him behind his neck.* Which prophecy was indeed fulfilled in those subsequent golden ages. About these, I will speak individually, but very briefly.
   Nerva was a learned man, a familiar friend and as it were a disciple of that Pythagorean Apollonius. He also almost breathed his last with that verse of Homer:
   *With your arrows, Phoebus, avenge our tears.*
                                          Tra-

--- Page 90 ---
68      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
   *Trajan* himself was not indeed learned, but an admirer of learning, and munificent towards learned men, a founder of libraries, and it is recorded that in his court (although he was a warlike Emperor) professors and teachers were most favored. *Hadrian*, the most curious of mortals, and an insatiable investigator of every variety and secret. *Antoninus*, subtle and, as it were, scholastic, whence he was also called "Cumin-splitter". Of the *Divine Brothers*, however, *Lucius Commodus* was learned in a softer kind of literature. *Marcus*, also by his very surname, "Philosopher". These Princes, as they were most learned, so too were they most excellent.
   *Nerva*, a most clement Emperor, and who, if nothing else, gave *Trajan* to the world. *Trajan*, of all who ruled, most flourishing in the arts of both war and peace: He also extended the boundaries of the Empire very far; he also most modestly restrained the force of his dominion: Also a builder of very great works; whence by *Constantine*, he was called "Parietaria" out of envy, because his name was inscribed on so many walls. *Hadrian*, a rival of time itself: for he repaired the injuries and ruins of time, of every kind, with his care and munificence. *Antoninus*, (as he was also called) a man most *Pious*, pleasing to all ranks by a certain native and inborn goodness, and whose reign (though not short) was free from all calamity. *Lucius Commodus*, indeed yielding to his brother in goodness, (but surpassing) the other Empe-
                                        rors

--- Page 91 ---
LIBER I. 69

...perors, surpassing very many. *Marcus*, a man fashioned as an ex-
ample of virtue, against whom that jes-
ter, at the banquet of the Gods, had nothing
to object, except his patience regarding the morals
of his wife. In this continuous series of six Prin-
ces, therefore, anyone may see the most fortunate
fruits of learning, placed in the Empire,
depicted on the greatest tablet of the world.

Now indeed, learning has an influence not only
in civil matters, and the arts of peace, but also
exercises its strength and po-
wer in military virtue; as is clearly perceived in the examples of Alexan-
der the Great, and Caesar the Dictator; whom
we previously mentioned in passing, but now we will discuss them a lit-
tle more fully. Their military virtues, and deeds accomplished in war, it would be
superfluous to note, or recount, since in that kind
[of achievement] they were miracles of the world: but concerning their love,
and zeal for letters, and also their own excellence in
them, it will not be out of place, if we add a few things.

Alexander was educated and taught by
Aristotle, (certainly a great Philosopher) who
dedicated some of his philosophical books to him:
Callisthenes never departed from his side, and other very
learned men, who followed the camp, and were
constant companions of all his journeys and expeditions:
moreover, how highly he valued letters, not a few things
clearly demonstrate: Such as the envy, by which worthy

--- Page 92 ---
70      Oɴ ᴛʜᴇ Aᴜɢᴍᴇɴᴛᴀᴛɪᴏɴ ᴏғ Sᴄɪᴇɴᴄᴇs.
he judged worthy the fortune of Achilles, because he had found
Homer as the herald of his deeds and praises: His judgment concerning the precious
casket of Darius, found among the other spoils,
about which when a question was raised, what
indeed would be most worthy to be preserved in it,
he himself, when others said different things, gave his opinion for
Homer's works: The reproving letter
sent to Aristotle, after
he had published the books of Physics, in which he complained
that he had divulged the Mysteries of Philosophy;
and at the same time he wrote back, that he preferred to excel
in learning and knowledge, rather than in power and empire.
There are also other things that pertain to this. He himself truly, how excellently he had cultivated his mind
with learning, appears, or rather shines forth, in all his sayings and
responses, most full of erudition;
in which, although few in number
which still survive, you may find the deeply impressed traces
of individual sciences.
   In Moral Philosophy, let Alexander's Apophthegm first be observed
concerning Diogenes, and observe (if you please)
if perhaps it does not constitute one of the most serious
questions of moral philosophy: *Whether he who enjoys external goods,*
*is happier, or he who despises them?* For when he saw Diogenes,
content with so little, turning to those standing around,
who were mocking his condition, he said, "*Unless I were*
*Alexander, I would wish to be Diogenes.*" But Seneca, in
this comparison, preferred Diogenes,
                                                                 when

--- Page 93 ---
L I B E R I. 71

...when he said, *'there was more that Diogenes would not accept, than what Alexander could give.'*

In natural philosophy, let that be observed which he frequently asserted: *'That he most perceived his mortality in two things, sleep and desire:'* which saying was indeed drawn from the deepest natural philosophy, wise not so much for Alexander, as for Aristotle or Democritus, since both the need and the excess of nature, designated by those two, are as it were pledges of death.

In Poetics, let that saying be observed, when, with blood flowing from his wounds, he summoned one of his flatterers, who used to attribute divinity to him, and said, *'Look, this is the blood of a man, not such a liquid as Homer said flowed from the hand of Venus, wounded by Diomedes;'* by this saying ridiculing both the poets, and his flatterers, and himself.

In Dialectics, take that rebuke of dialectical subtleties, concerning arguments to be rejected and retorted, in his saying by which he censured Cassander, who was repelling the accusers of his father Antipater. For when Alexander had by chance said, *'Do you think these men would have undertaken such a long journey, unless they had a just cause for their grievance?'* Cassander replied, *'On the contrary, this very thing gave them courage, that they hoped the length of the journey would hinder the calumny from being exposed.'* *'Bravo,'* said the King, *'Aristotle's tricks, a thing'* for...

--- Page 94 ---
72 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
twisting things for and against.’ Nevertheless, he himself knew well how to use that very art, which he criticized in another, when the situation demanded it, for his own advantage. For it so happened that Callisthenes (whom he secretly hated because he opposed Alexander’s new claim to divinity) had been asked at a certain banquet by one of those reclining at table, for the sake of entertainment (since he was a most eloquent man), to choose some topic at his discretion, about which he should speak extemporaneously; and he, assenting, and choosing the praises of the Macedonian nation, spoke with wonderful applause from everyone. But Alexander, not at all pleased by this, rejoined, "*in a good cause, it is easy for anyone to be eloquent. Nay, turn,* he said, *your style, and let us hear what you can do against us.*" Callisthenes took the task upon himself, and performed it so bitterly and so sharply, that Alexander, interrupting, said, "*Even malice, just as a good cause, imparts eloquence.*"

--- Page 95 ---
The accused. Also that remarkable metaphor: When Parmenio approached him in the Plains of Arbela, and showed him a huge army of enemies, which, visible at night due to the infinite number of fires, represented as it were another firmament of stars; and therefore advised that he should attack them in a night battle, "I am unwilling," said Alexander, "to steal a victory."

In politics, note that most weighty and most prudent distinction (which all posterity has embraced) by which he distinguished two of his principal friends, Hephaestion and Craterus, when he said, "One loves Alexander, the other loves the King:" establishing a dissimilarity of the greatest importance, even among the most faithful servants of kings, that some pursue the persons of their masters with true affection, while others are moved rather by duty towards the principate itself. Let it also be observed how excellently he refuted an error common to the counselors of princes, who for the most part suggest counsels according to the measure of their own mind and fortune, not their masters'. When Darius offered great conditions to Alexander, Parmenio [said]; "I," he said, "if I were Alexander, would accept them." Alexander replied, "And I indeed, if I were Parmenio." Finally, let that sharp and acute response be examined, to friends asking what he reserved for himself, when so many and such great

--- Page 96 ---
74 DE AUGM. SCIENT.
so many and such great things?" "Hope," he said. For he knew well, having calculated, that hope was a true asset, and as it were an inheritance, for those aspiring to great things. This was the asset of Julius Caesar, when, setting out for Gaul, he had exhausted all his resources. This was also the asset, through lavish donations, of Henry, Duke of Guise, a most noble Prince, though excessively ambitious. Concerning whom that saying became common, *that he was the greatest usurer of all the Gauls, because he held all his wealth in names, and had converted his entire patrimony into obligations.* But the admiration for this Prince, while I present him to myself not as Alexander the Great, but as a disciple of Aristotle, has perhaps carried me too far.
As for Julius Caesar, there is no need for us to make conjectures about the excellence of his learning, either from his education, or from his acquaintances, or from his own responses. For this indeed stands out in his writings and books: some of which are extant, others are unfortunately missing. For first, today, that remarkable history of his wars is held in hand, to which he merely prefixed the name and title of Commentaries: In which all posterity admire the solid weight of events, and vivid representations of both actions and persons, combined with the purest purity of language and an extraordinary clarity of narration: which qualities, indeed, were not infused by nature,

--- Page 97 ---
L I B E R I. 75
had been, but acquired from the precepts and institutions of learning, his book on _Analogy_ testifies:
which was nothing else than a certain Grammatical Philosophy;
in which he diligently strove that arbitrary speech should be rendered speech according to rule; and that the custom of speaking in any way whatsoever should be recalled to the propriety of speaking correctly; and that words, which are images of things, should agree with the things themselves, and not entirely follow the arbitrary will of the common people.
    Thus also, as a monument of learning, no less than of power, we have his computation of the year, corrected by his edict; which clearly testifies that he considered it equally glorious for himself to know the laws of the stars in the heavens, as to give laws to men on earth.
    Also from the book, to which he prefixed the title _Anti-Cato_, it is readily apparent that he was inflamed with as much zeal for the victory of intellect, as for that of war and arms, to be obtained; then undertaking a contest of the pen against the greatest champion of that time, Cicero the Orator.
    Again, in the book of Apophthegms, which we see he collected, he thought it more honorable for himself if he were to transform himself as it were into Tablets or Notebooks, into which the wise and weighty sayings of others might be recorded; than if his own sayings were consecrated as oracles, as some foolish Princes, corrupted by flattery, eagerly desire to have done for themselves. Nevertheless, if I wished to recount most of his sayings, (as I did in Ale -

--- Page 98 ---
76      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
Alexander), they are certainly of this kind, such as
Solomon notes, *The words of the wise are like*
*goads, and like nails driven deep.* Therefore, I will propose only three here, remarkable not so much for their elegance, as for their power and efficacy.

First then, he must be a master of speech, who could suppress a mutiny in the army with a single word. And the matter stood thus. It was the custom for Romans, when commanders addressed the army, to call them soldiers; when a magistrate addressed the people, *Quirites*. Caesar's soldiers were rioting, and seditiously demanding their discharge; not because they themselves desired this, but so that by this demand they might force Caesar to other terms. He, unmoved and unshaken, having made silence, thus began: *I, Quirites:* By which word, he signified that they were already discharged. Struck by this, and utterly astonished, the soldiers thereafter continually interrupted him as he harangued, and setting aside that demand for discharge, on the contrary, earnestly begged that the appellation of soldiers be restored to them.

The second was of this kind. Caesar greatly desired the title of King. Therefore, some were suborned to greet him as King with popular acclamation as he passed by. He, perceiving that the acclamation had been faint and rare; dismissed the matter with a joke, as if a mistake had been made in the surname, "*I am not King,*"
                                             he said,

--- Page 99 ---
L I B E R I. 77
he said, "but Caesar." A saying indeed of this kind, that if it is diligently examined, its vigor and weight can scarcely be expressed. For first, it presented a refusal of the name, but by no means serious: Then it showed a certain immense confidence and magnanimity; as if the appellation of Caesar were a more illustrious title than that of King; which indeed turned out to be true, and has held true even to this day. But what most concerned him, this saying, with supreme artifice, pursued its goal. For this implied that the Senate and People of Rome were contending with him about a trivial matter, that is, merely about a name (for he had long since possessed royal power), and about such a name as many even from obscure families bore: For the surname 'Rex' was hereditary for many Romans, just as we also have something similar in our own idiom.

The last thing which it pleases to repeat in this place was as follows. When Caesar, after the war had begun, had occupied Rome and had opened the sacred Treasury, in order to take the money collected there for the uses of war, Metellus resisted, as he was at that time Tribune; to whom Caesar [said], *"If you persist,"* he said, *"you are dead."* Then, restraining himself a little, he added, *"Young man, it is harder for me to say this than to do it."* A saying so wonderfully forged from terror and clemency, that nothing could be more so.

E                  Truly

--- Page 100 ---
78      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
But to leave Caesar aside; it is clear that he was deeply conscious of his outstanding learning; as is evident from the fact that, when some were admiring Lucius Sulla's decision to lay down the Dictatorship, he quipped, *Sulla did not know letters, he could not dictate.*
   But now it seems time to put an end to this discussion concerning the close connection between military virtue and literary learning; (for what, in this kind, can be brought forward after Alexander and Caesar?) unless I am moved by the dignity and extraordinary nature of one other example, because it so suddenly passed from ridicule to a miracle. It is, moreover, that of Xenophon the Philosopher, who, having set out from Socrates' school into Asia with Cyrus the Younger, on an expedition against King Artaxerxes. This Xenophon was at that time a mere youth, and had never seen a battle line or camps, nor did he then hold any command in the army, but only voluntarily, on account of

--- Page 101 ---
L I B E R I. 79
before a public answer had been given, many
from the army were familiarly conversing with Fali-
nus. Among whom Xenophon happened to speak thus:
*“Indeed,” he said, “Falinus, only these two things*
*now remain for us, arms and valor. If therefore*
*we surrender our arms, of what use (I ask) will*
*valor be to us?”* But Falinus, smiling, said, *“Unless I am*
*mistaken, you are an Athenian (young man) and*
*you are devoted to philosophy; and what you say is*
*quite pretty, but you are greatly mistaken if you*
*think your valor is equal to the King’s forces.”* Behold the
mockery. A miracle follows. This novice
from the School, and Philosopher, after all the
Generals and Commanders had been killed by treachery,
led ten thousand foot soldiers from Babylon back to
Greece, through the midst of the King’s pro-
vinces, with all his forces resisting in vain:
By which deed he struck everyone with astonish-
ment. To the Greeks, moreover, from that time he added
immense courage and spirit, for invading and
overthrowing the Persian Kingdom. Which
Jason the Thessalian indeed soon thought of and designed;
Agesilaus the Spartan attempted and began;
and finally Alexander the Macedonian completed,
all learned men, incited by the excellent deed
of that predecessor.

Let us proceed from imperial and military
valor to moral virtue, and that which belongs to
private individuals. First, that saying of the
Poet is most certain:

            E 2 Sci-

--- Page 102 ---
80      On the Advancement of Learning
*Indeed, to have diligently learned the liberal arts*
*Softens character, nor allows it to be wild.*
For indeed, learning strips human minds of savagery
and barbarism. However, it is necessary
that the emphasis be on that word *diligently*. For su-
perficial knowledge rather turns in the opposite di-
rection; learning, I say, removes frivolity, rash-
ness, and insolence, while it suggests all
dangers and ambiguities along with the matter itself;
it weighs the force of reasons and arguments
on both sides; it holds as suspect all the first things
that offer themselves to the mind and please it;
and teaches to undertake every journey as if it were ex-
plored. The same (learning) uproots vain and excessive admiration
for things, the very root
of all weak counsel: for we admire
things either because they are new, or because they are great.

As for novelty, there is no one who
has thoroughly absorbed literature and the contemplation
of things, without having that impressed upon his
heart, *Nothing new under the sun*. Nor indeed
will anyone greatly admire a puppet show,
who, putting his head behind the curtains, sees the me-
chanisms by which they are moved, and the strings.

As for greatness, just as Alexander
the Great, accustomed to immense battles
and victories in Asia, when he sometimes
received letters from Greece, concerning certain
expeditions and skirmishes made there,
which mostly on account of some bridge,
or a Castle, or at most for the
                                                               capture of

--- Page 103 ---
LIBER I. 81
capture of some town, he used to say that it seemed to him a message had been brought concerning the battle of frogs and mice, about which Homer wrote. Thus certainly, whoever contemplates the totality of things and its structure, to him the globe of the earth, with men standing upon it (if you set aside the divinity of souls), will seem nothing greater than a little hill of ants, of which some with grains, others with their eggs, others unburdened, all here and there around a tiny heap of dust, crawl and run about. Furthermore, learning takes away, or at least diminishes, the fear of death and of adverse fortune, than which nothing is more accustomed to harm virtues and morals. For if the mind of anyone has been imbued and steeped in the contemplation of mortality and the corruptible nature of things, he will feel just as Epictetus; who, when going out the day before, he saw a little woman weeping over a broken pot, and going out also the next day, he saw another woman lamenting her dead son, said; "Yesterday I saw a fragile thing broken, today I saw a mortal die." Therefore, most excellently and very wisely, Virgil coupled the knowledge of causes with the vanquishing of all fear, as if they were Concomitants.
*Happy is he who has been able to know the causes of things,*
*And who has placed all fears, and inexorable fate*
*under his feet, and the roar of greedy Acheron.*

        E 3                Nimis

--- Page 104 ---
Dᴇ Aᴜɢᴍ. Sᴄɪᴇɴᴛ.
It would be too long to go through each remedy which learning
supplies for individual diseases of the mind; sometimes pur-
ging vicious humors, sometimes opening obstructions, at other
times aiding digestion, at other times exciting appetite, not
infrequently healing its wounds and ulcers, and similar things.
Therefore I will conclude with this, which seems to contain the
reason of the whole: namely, that learning so disposes and bends
the mind that it never immediately acquiesces and as it were
freezes in its defects, but rather always incites itself and breathes
progress. The unlearned man does not know what it is to descend
into himself, or to take account with himself, or how sweet a life
it is which daily feels itself becoming better; if by chance he is
endowed with any virtue, he will certainly boast of it and display
it everywhere to be seen, and perhaps use it conveniently, but
neglects to cultivate and increase it. Again, if he labors under
any vice, he will apply art and industry to concealing and hiding
it, but by no means to correcting it; like a bad reaper who
perpetually reaps but never sharpens his sickle: the learned man,
on the contrary, not only uses his mind and exercises virtue, but
continually amends himself and makes progress in virtue. Indeed,
to speak in sum, it is certain that truth and goodness are distin-
guished only as a seal and its impression: for truth stamps
goodness: And on the contrary, the storms of vices and pertur-
                                                                 bations,

--- Page 105 ---
L I B E R I. 83
storms, burst forth from the clouds of error and falsehood.

From virtue let us pass to power and dominion, and let us consider if anywhere is found such power and kingdom as learning invests and crowns human nature. We see that the dignity of commanding follows the dignity of him who is commanded. Dominion over wild beasts and cattle, such as that of herdsmen or shepherds, is a base thing; dominion over boys, such as that of schoolmasters, is less honorable; dominion over slaves is rather a disgrace than an honor. Nor is much more excellent the rule of tyrants over a servile people, stripped of spirit and noble character. Whence this judgment has always flowed, that honors in free Monarchies or Republics are sweeter than under tyrants; because honorable rule is more over those who are willing than over those who are unwilling and compelled. And therefore Virgil, when with profound art he wished to bring forth by far the best among human honors, which he might assign to Augustus Caesar, speaks in these very words,
                --- And as victor he gives laws
  To willing peoples, and aims his way
      To Olympus.
But the dominion of knowledge is far loftier than dominion over the will, even if free and unconstrained. For that rules over reason, faith, and the intellect itself, which is the
                E 4             highest

--- Page 106 ---
84 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
most exalted part of the soul, and governs the will itself. For without doubt, there is no earthly power that erects and establishes its throne, and as it were, its chair, in the spirits of men, and in their souls, and in their thoughts, and fantasies, and also in their assent and faith, except doctrine and knowledge. And therefore we see that detestable and immense delight with which Heresiarchs, false Prophets, and great impostors are imbued and carried away, after they have perceived that they have begun to reign in the faith and consciences of men: so great indeed, that whoever has once tasted it can scarcely be compelled by any persecutions or torments to abdicate this kingdom. But just as this is what is said in the Apocalypse, *the Abyss or depths of Satan*: so, on the contrary, a just and legitimate dominion over the minds of men, established by the very evidence of truth and the sweetest commendation, certainly approaches very closely to the likeness of divine power.
   As for fortunes and honors, the munificence of learning does not thus enrich entire kingdoms and republics,

--- Page 107 ---
L I B E R I. 85
whether arms or letters have established the fortunes of many. Moreover, if we speak of supreme power, we see that if arms, or the right of inheritance, have conferred a Kingdom, yet the priesthood, which was always a rival to the kingdom, has more often yielded to the power of letters.

  Furthermore, if you consider the delight and pleasure of knowledge, it certainly surpasses all other pleasures by a great deal. What then? Do the pleasures of the affections perhaps exceed the delights of the senses by such a great interval, as the happy attainment of a wish (exceeds) a little song or a dinner? And will not the pleasures of the intellect, by a similar gradation, transcend those of the affections? In other delights, satiety is close at hand, and after they have grown a little old, their flower and charm wither; by which we are taught that those were not truly real and sincere pleasures, but only shadows and deceptions of pleasures, pleasant not so much by their own quality as by their novelty; whence also voluptuaries often become Monks, and the old age of ambitious princes is almost sadder and beset by melancholy. But of knowledge there is no satiety, but a perpetually and repeatedly recurring alternation of enjoying and desiring; so that it must be that the good of this delight is simple, not accidental, or with fraud. Nor does that pleasure, which Lucretius depicts, obtain the ultimate place in the mind;
            E 5            Sweet

--- Page 108 ---
86 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
It is pleasant, when on the great sea the waters are stirred by
    Winds, &c.
It is a pleasant sight, (he says,) for one standing or
walking on the shore, to gaze at a ship
tossed by a storm on the sea: it is likewise pleasant from
a high tower to behold two armies clashing on
a plain: but nothing is sweeter to man than a mind
through learning, placed in the citadel of truth, whence
it can discern the errors and toils of others.

Finally, to set aside those common arguments, namely, that through learning, man
excels man in the same way he himself excels beasts: that
by the aid of learning man ascends in intellect even
to the heavens, whither he cannot by body: and
other similar things: let us conclude this discourse on
the excellence of letters with that good to
which human nature aspires above all things,
that is, immortality and eternity. For to this tend
the procreation of offspring, the ennobling
of family, buildings, foundations, monu-
ments, fame, and finally, the sum of human
desires. But we see how much longer monuments
of genius and learning endure than those
which are made by work and hand. Have not
Homer's Poems endured for twenty-five
centuries and more, without the loss of a single
syllable or letter? In which space of time
innumerable Palaces, Temples, Castles,
Cities, have collapsed or been destroyed. The paintings and
statues of Cyrus, Alexander, Caesar, indeed, of Kings
and Princes much more recent, nowhere now
                                                                are

--- Page 109 ---
LIBER I. 87
are now nothing; they are only to be procured [in a limited fashion]: for the archetypes themselves, long since consumed by old age, have perished; but the copies are daily deprived of their original likeness. But the images of minds remain perpetually intact in books, subject to no injuries of time, inasmuch as they can receive constant renewal: Although they cannot properly be called images, because they perpetually generate in a certain way, and scatter their seeds into the minds of men, and in subsequent ages arouse and bring forth infinite actions and opinions. But if the invention of the ship has been esteemed a thing so noble and admirable, which transports wealth and merchandise hither and thither, and unites regions most widely separated by the sharing of fruits and advantages; how much more rightly ought letters to be celebrated, which, like ships plowing the Ocean of time, connect the most remote ages by the commerce and society of minds and inventions? Furthermore, we see that some philosophers, who were most immersed in the senses, and least divine, and stubbornly denied the immortality of the soul; nevertheless, compelled by the force of truth, conceded this, that whatever motions and actions the human soul can perform without a bodily organ, it is probable that these also remain after death: such, indeed, were intellectual acts, but by no means the motions of the affections. So truly, knowledge seemed to them an immortal thing,
E 6 and

--- Page 110 ---
**ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.**
and incorruptible. But we, upon whom divine revelation has shone, trampling underfoot these rudiments and the deceptions of the senses, know that not only the mind, but also the affections, purified, and not only the soul, but also the body, will be assumed to immortality in its own time. But let men remember, both now and elsewhere when it shall be necessary, that in the proofs concerning the dignity of knowledge, from the very beginning I have separated divine testimonies from human ones; which method I have constantly maintained, explaining each separately.

Although these things are so, I by no means take this upon myself, nor do I trust that I can achieve it, that by any pleading or action for this cause of learning, I might overturn the judgments: either of *Aesop's Cock*, who preferred a grain of barley to a jewel; or of *Midas*, who, when he had been made judge between Apollo, patron of the Muses, and Pan, the President of the sheep, awarded the palm of wealth; or of *Paris*, who, despising wisdom and power, gave the first place to pleasure and love; or of *Agrippina*, choosing, '*Let him kill his mother, provided he rules*', preferring empire even with a detestable condition; or of *Ulysses*, who preferred an old woman to immortality, certainly types of those who prefer the accustomed to the best: and many such popular judgments. For these will hold their ancient sway: But that also will remain, upon which learning has always rested as its firmest foundation

--- Page 111 ---
LIBER I. 89
dation, and which can never be overthrown,
*Wisdom is justified by her children.*

OF FRANCIS BACON
OF VERULAM,
Viscount St. Alban,
*On the Dignity and Advancement*
*of the Sciences,*
BOOK THE SECOND,
*To his King.*

[Decorative initial C]It might seem consistent, al-
though not infrequently it happens otherwise,
(Most excellent King) that those
who are blessed with numerous off-
spring, and who, as it were, foresee their im-
mortality in their descendants, should be more
solicitous than other mortals about the state of future times; in-
asmuch as they well understand that those dearest
pledges of theirs must eventually be transmitted. *Queen
Elizabeth*, because of her celibate life, was a
guest rather than an inhabitant in the world; she
indeed adorned her own times, and blessed them in many ways.
But indeed to Your Majesty, (to whom God, in His
bounty, has given so many children to raise,
worthy indeed to perpetuate you, and whose
                                        vigorous age,

--- Page 112 ---
90. ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCES.
vigorous, and fertile bed, still promises more) it is altogether fitting, not only to illuminate your own age (which you do); but also to extend your cares to those things which all memory nourishes, and which eternity itself may behold. Among these things, however (unless my zeal for letters deceives me), nothing is more worthy, or nobler, than if the world were endowed with solid and fruitful *Augmentations of Sciences*. For how long, pray, shall we finally set up a few writers for ourselves as *Pillars of Hercules, lest we advance further* in doctrines; when we have Your Majesty, like a bright and benign Star, which may guide and and prosper us while we navigate?

Therefore, to return to the matter: Let us now recall, and weigh with ourselves, what leading Men, and others, have hitherto contributed to the amplification of letters, and what they have omitted? Let us, however, examine this precisely and distinctly, in a certain Active and Masculine discourse, nowhere digressing, nothing amplifying.

Let it therefore be posited, (which anyone would concede) that all the greatest and most difficult works are overcome either by the amplitude of rewards, or by the prudence and soundness of counsels, or by the conjunction of labors: Of which the first stimulates effort, the second removes ambiguities and errors, the third succors the fragility of mortals. But among these three, *the prudence and soundness of Counsel* rightly holds the first place; that is, the Demonstration,

--- Page 113 ---
circa personas eruditorum. Quemadmo-
dum enim aqua,sive ex cœlesti rore descen-
dens, sive ex fontibus scaturiens , facile dif-
perditur , nisi colligatur in aliqua receptacu-
la , ubi per unionem & congregationem se
sustentare & fovere possit , ( quem in finem
excogitavit solertia humana Aquæductus,
Cysternas, Stagna, eaque etiam variis orna-
mentis

***

concerning learned persons. For just as
water, whether descending from heavenly dew,
or gushing from springs, is easily dis-
persed, unless it is collected in some receptacles,
where through union and congregation it can
sustain and foster itself (for which purpose
human ingenuity devised Aqueducts,
Cisterns, Ponds, and these also with various adorn-
ments

--- Page 114 ---
92      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
ments of the mind, which serve Magnificence
and Dignity, no less than Use and Necessity) similarly that most precious liquor of Knowledge, whether it distills from Divine inspiration, or springs from the Senses, would soon entirely perish and vanish, unless it were preserved in Books, Traditions, Colloquies, and especially in certain places designated for these things, such as Academies, Colleges, Schools, where it may have permanent seats, and moreover, the opportunity and faculty for growing and gathering itself.

   And first, the Works which pertain to the *Seats of the Muses* are four in number: The structure of Buildings; The endowment of Revenues; The granting of Privileges; The Law and Institution of Discipline; All of which contribute (for the most part) to retreat and leisure, and to freedom from cares and troubles: such as those things which Virgil requires for establishing Beehives, for the use of honey;

   *First a seat and station must be sought for the bees,*
   *Where there is no access for winds, etc.*

   But the Works concerning *Books* are two principal ones. First, Libraries, in which, as in Mausoleums, the relics of ancient Saints, full of virtue, are stored. Secondly, new editions of Authors, with more corrected impressions, more faithful versions, more useful commentaries, annotations more

--- Page 115 ---
...more diligent annotations, and furnished and adorned with service of this kind.

Furthermore, the works which concern the *Persons of Learned Men* (besides the fact that they themselves are to be honored and promoted) are also two: The remuneration and appointment of Lecturers, in arts long since invented and known; and the remuneration and appointment of writers, concerning those parts of doctrine which have not hitherto been sufficiently cultivated or elaborated.

These, in summary, are the works and deeds in which the merits of illustrious Princes and other distinguished men, towards the literary realm, have become clear. When thinking about the particular commemoration of anyone who has deserved well of Letters, that saying of Cicero comes to mind, which impelled him, after his return, to give thanks indiscriminately; *It is difficult to include anyone ungrateful.* Rather (following the counsel of the scriptures), let us look at the space that still remains to be run in the race, than turn our eyes back to those things which we have long since left behind.

First therefore, among so many Colleges throughout Europe, most splendidly founded, I am astonished that all of them are destined for certain Professions, none dedicated to free and universal studies of arts and sciences. For if anyone judges that all Doctrine should be referred to *Use and Action*, he is wise: Nevertheless, it is easy in that way to fall into error.

--- Page 116 ---
94      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
that thing which a very ancient Fable re-
lates; in which the other Members of the Body brought a suit
against the Stomach, because it neither afforded
motion, like the limbs, nor sensation, like
the head: although meanwhile that stomach distributed
the food, cooked and prepared, to the rest of
the body. Plainly in the same way, he who considers
all study placed in Philosophy and universal
Contemplations to be empty and idle, does not
observe that from thence sap and strength are supplied
to individual Professions and Arts.
And certainly I am persuaded that this very thing
has been no small cause why the progress of Learning
has hitherto been retarded; because work devoted
to these fundamental sciences has been only in passing,
and no deeper draughts have been drunk from them.
For if you desire a tree to become more fruitful
than usual, you will have thought in vain of treating
the branches; the Earth itself around the root must be
tilled, and richer soil applied, or you will have done
nothing. Nor again must it be passed over in silence,
that this dedication of Colleges and societies solely
to the use of Professorial Learning, has not only
been hostile to the advancements of sciences, but also
has redounded to the detriment of Kingdoms and Republics.
For hence it usually happens that Princes, when they are
about to make a selection of ministers who are suitable
for handling civil affairs, find a wonderful
                                     scarcity

--- Page 117 ---
L I B E R II. 95
solitude around them; because there is no Collegiate Education, destined for these uses, where namely men made and prepared by Nature for this, (besides other arts) may especially apply themselves to History, modern languages, political books and treatises; so that from there they may come to civil offices more capable and instructed.
   But since the Founders of Colleges plant, and Lectures water; it now follows in order, that I should say what is lacking in public Lectures, Namely, I condemn most strongly the meagerness of the stipends assigned to Lecturers, whether of Arts or of Professions, (especially among us). For it is especially important for the progress in Sciences, that Lecturers in each kind be chosen from the best and most learned: inasmuch as their work is applied not for transient use; but for supplying the Offspring of Science, for ages. This cannot happen, unless such rewards and conditions are established, by which each most eminent person in that Art can be plainly content; so that finally it may not be burdensome for him to die in the same office, nor to think of Practice. Therefore, for Sciences to flourish, the Military law of David must be observed; *That the share of him who goes down to battle, and of him who remains with the baggage, should be equal;* Otherwise, the baggage will be poorly provided for. Thus Lecturers in Sciences are as it were the Preservers and Guardians of the whole Literary appara—

--- Page 118 ---
Dᴇ Aᴜɢᴍ. Sᴄɪᴇɴᴛ.
apparatus, from which the practice and warfare of the sciences may subsequently be instructed: therefore it is fair that their rewards can equal the profits of practitioners. Otherwise, if sufficiently ample and lucrative rewards are not established for the fathers of the sciences, that will come to pass:
   *And the feeble offspring will bear the privations*
      *of their fathers.*
   Now I will note another defect, in which some Alchemist would have to be called in for help; since this kind of men are the instigators for students to sell books, build furnaces, abandon Minerva and the Muses (as sterile virgins), and apply themselves to Vulcan. For it must truly be confessed that, as much for the inner secrets of contemplation as for the fruit of practical work, in some sciences (especially natural Philosophy and Medicine), aids are not solely to be sought from books. In this matter, the generosity of men has by no means entirely ceased; for we see that not only Books, but also Spheres, Globes, Astrolabes, Maps, and other similar things, as certain aids for Astronomy and Cosmography, are acquired and provided for study. We also see that some places dedicated to the study of Medicine have gardens for the inspection and knowledge of simples of every kind; nor are they deprived of the use of dead bodies for anatomical observations. But these things pertain to few. In general, let it be held for certain, great, in matters

--- Page 119 ---
L I B E R II. 97
for discovering and revealing the hidden things of nature,
progress can scarcely be made, unless for experiments,
whether of Vulcan or Daedalus (that is, of the furnace,
or of a machine, or of any other kind), ample funds are supplied.
And therefore, just as the secretaries and emissaries of princes
are allowed to present accounts of expenses for their diligence
in exploring and discovering new things and civil secrets; similarly,
the explorers and observers of nature must be satisfied
concerning their expenses; otherwise, we shall never be certain
of very many things. For if Alexander supplied Aristotle
with a great sum of money, with which he might hire hunters,
fowlers, fishermen, and others, so that he might approach
the writing of the history of animals better equipped;
certainly something greater is owed to those who do not
wander through the forests of nature, but open a path
for themselves in the Labyrinths of the arts.

Yet another defect to be observed by us (certainly of great
importance) is a certain neglect, in the Rectors of Academies,
of consultation; in kings or superiors, of visitation;
to this end, that it may be diligently considered and weighed,
whether lectures, disputations, and other scholastic exercises,
anciently instituted and used up to our own times,
would be useful to continue, or rather to abolish them
and substitute better ones. For among Your Majesty's Canons

--- Page 120 ---
98      On the Advancement of Learning
...most prudent ones, I find him. *In every*
*custom or example, the times must be considered, when a thing was first begun: in*
*which if either confusion reigned, or igno-*
*rance, that especially detracts from the authority of things, and renders everything suspect.* Wherefore,
since the institutions of Academies have
for the most part drawn their origin from
times not a little more obscure and unlearned than our own: it is all the more fitting
that they be subjected to examination anew. An example
or two in this kind I will propose,
in matters which seem most obvious and fa-
miliar. It is customary, (though, as it
seems to me, wrongly) that students of letters
learn Logic and Rhetoric too prematurely;
arts indeed more suitable for the more advanced,
than for boys and beginners. For these two,
if the matter is truly weighed, are among the most serious arts; since they are *the arts*
*of arts*, the one for judgment, the other for or-
nament. Moreover, they contain the rule and standard
for either arranging or illustrating the subject matter. And therefore to act thus,
that minds ignorant and crude in matters, (and
which have not yet gathered that which by Cice-
ro is called *Sylva* or *Supellex*, that is,
material and abundance of things,) should begin with these
sciences; (as if one wished to learn to
weigh, or measure, or adorn the wind:)
produces nothing else indeed than that of these
                               arts

--- Page 121 ---
L I B E R II. 99
the virtue and faculty of these arts (which are very great
and very widely diffused) almost lie despised,
and either degenerate into childish sophistries and ridiculous
affectations, or at
least are not a little deprived of their proper
estimation. Moreover, the premature and untimely
access to these arts has necessarily brought with it a diluted
and meager tradition and treatment of them,
such as is naturally adapted to the capacity of boys. Another
example (which I will adduce) of an error which
has long become inveterate in Academies, is of this kind;
namely, that in scholastic exercises, a separation
of invention and memory, too pernicious, is usually made:
For there, indeed, most orations are either entirely premeditated,
so that they are delivered in set words,
and nothing is left to invention; or entirely
extemporaneous, so that very little is left to
memory: (whereas in common life, and practice, the
separate use of either of these is rare, but
rather a mixture of them; that is, of Notes
or Commentaries, and sudden speech)
so that in this way exercises are not accommodated to practice,
nor does the image correspond to
life. But this must always be held in exercises;
that all things (as far as possible) should
most represent those things which are accustomed to be done in life;
otherwise they will pervert, not prepare, the movements and faculties of the mind.
The truth of this matter is not obscurely perceived, when Acade-
                                        mics

--- Page 122 ---
100        ON THE ADV. OF LEARNING.
demics prepare themselves for the practice of their Professions, or other
duties of civil life: when they do so, this defect, of which we speak,
they themselves quickly detect in themselves; but others even
more quickly. However, I will conclude this part, concerning the
amendment of academic institutions, with that
clause (taken from a certain letter of Caesar to
Oppius & Balbus): *How this can be done, some*
*things come to my mind, and many things can*
*be found: concerning these matters I ask you to give*
*thought.*
    Another defect, which I observe, ascends a little
higher than the preceding one. For just as the
progress of learning consists considerably in the prudent governance and institution
of individual Academies; so a great advantage could
accrue to this, if all Academies, scattered throughout all Europe,
were to form a closer union and connection.
For there are, as we see, many orders and societies
which, although separated by kingdoms and long
distances, nevertheless enter into and cultivate a society and as it were a brotherhood among themselves;
so much so that they have superiors
(some provincial, others general), whom
all obey. And certainly, just as nature
creates brotherhood in families; mechanical
arts contract brotherhood in societies;
divine anointing superinduces brotherhood
in kings and Bishops; vows and rules
                                unite

--- Page 123 ---
101
reconcile brotherhood in orders: in the same way, it cannot happen but that an illustrious and generous brotherhood should exist among men, through doctrines and illuminations, inasmuch as God himself is called the Father of men.

Finally, I complain about this (concerning which I have previously made some preliminary remarks), that either never, or very rarely, has there been any public designation of suitable men, who would either write, or institute an inquiry, concerning those parts of the sciences in which sufficient work has not yet been done.

For this purpose, it will be most useful if a survey of doctrines is established, and a census is taken, to determine which of them are rich and greatly augmented, and which are poor and destitute.

For the opinion of abundance is among the causes of poverty; and the multitude of books presents itself as an indication of luxury rather than of scarcity.

This redundancy, however (if one judges correctly), should by no means be removed by destroying books written previously, but by publishing new and better ones, which are of such a kind that, like the serpent of Moses, they devour the serpents of the Magicians.

The remedies for all these defects which we have enumerated, except for that last one, indeed even for that same last one, as regards its active part, which relates to the designation of writers, are truly Royal works: Towards which, F which,

--- Page 124 ---
102 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
As for which [works], the efforts and industry of any private individual are almost like Mercury at the Crossroads, who can point a finger towards the road, but cannot set foot upon it. But that speculative part, which pertains to the examination of doctrines (what indeed is lacking in each), is also open to the industry of a private individual. Therefore, it is my intention to undertake a survey of doctrines, and a general and faithful review, especially with a diligent and accurate inquiry into which of their parts lie neglected and uncultivated, not yet subdued by human industry and converted to use; so that a delineation and registration of this kind may light a torch both for public initiatives and for the spontaneous labors of private individuals. In which, nevertheless, the plan is, at this time, only to note omissions and desiderata; but not to refute errors and infelicities. For it is one thing to point out uncultivated places, another to correct the method of cultivation.

Indeed, for this task, as I prepare myself and gird myself for action, I am not unaware how great a work I undertake, and how difficult an undertaking I sustain; also how little my strengths are equal to my will: nevertheless, I entertain great hope, if a more ardent mind, a love for letters, has carried me further, I will use the excuse of passion; because it is not granted to anyone at the same time, *to Love and to be Wise*. Indeed, I am well aware that the same freedom of judgment
sup                  T                  to others

--- Page 125 ---
L I B E R II. 103
should be left to others, as I myself have exercised. Indeed, I would as gladly receive that office of humanity from others as I would impart it. *For he who kindly shows the way to one who is wandering, etc.* I also foresee in my mind that many of those things which it will have seemed good to include in this our Register as omissions and desiderata, will incur various criticisms: some, namely, because they have long since been accomplished and already exist; others because they savour of curiosity and promise very meager results; others because they are too arduous and almost impossible for men to accomplish. As far as the first two are concerned, the things themselves will plead their own cause; concerning the last point, regarding impossibility, I thus determine: All those things are to be considered possible and achievable which can be accomplished by some, although not by just anyone; and which by many jointly, although not by one; and which in the succession of ages, although not in the same age; and finally, which by public care and expense, although not by the wealth and industry of individuals. If there is anyone, however, who would prefer to use that saying of Solomon, *The sluggard says, There is a lion in the way;* rather than that of Virgil, *They can, because they seem to be able:* it will be enough for me if my labours are held merely among wishes or aspirations of a better kind. For just as it is not at all necessary to be unskilled in a matter to aptly pose a question; so neither should he seem devoid of sense who has wished for things by no means absurd.
          F 2          C A P.

--- Page 126 ---
104 On the Advancement of Learning.

C H A P. I.

*Universal Division of Human Doctrine, into His-*
*tory, Poesy, Philosophy, according to the three*
*Faculties of the Intellect, Memory, Imagination,*
*Reason: and that the same division also applies*
*to Theological matters.*

The truest division of *human doctrine* is that
which is taken from the threefold Faculty
of the Rational Soul, which is the seat of knowledge.
*History* is referred to *Memory*, *Poesy* to
*Imagination*, *Philosophy* to *Reason*. By
*Poesy*, however, in this place, we understand nothing
other than feigned history, or fables.
For verse is a certain characteristic of style,
and pertains to the artifices of speech; about
which in its proper place.
*History* properly concerns individuals, which
are circumscribed by place and time. Although
natural history also seems to deal with species;
nevertheless, this happens because of the general
similarity of natural things (in most cases) under one species;
so that if you know one, you know all. But
if individuals are found anywhere which are either
unique in their species, like the Sun and Moon;
or deviate significantly from the species, like monsters;
a narration concerning them is no less rightly constituted
in natural history, than concerning singular men
in civil history. All these things, however,
pertain to *Memory*.
                                                                *Poesy,*

--- Page 127 ---
L I B E R II.          105
Poetry, in the sense in which it has been defined, is also of in-
dividuals; invented in the likeness
of those which are recounted in true history;
yet so that it often exceeds moderation,
and, things which would never have come together
or happened in the nature of things, it composes
and introduces at will; just as
Painting also does. This indeed is the work
of Imagination.
   Philosophy dismisses individuals, and embraces not the primary im-
pressions of individuals, but no-
tions abstracted from them; and in
composing and dividing these, it is engaged according to the law of na-
ture, and the evidence of things themselves.
And this is entirely the office and work
of Reason.
   But if anyone seeks the origins of intel-
lectual things, he will easily perceive that these things are so. Indi-
viduals alone strike the sense, which is the gate
of the intellect. The images of individuals, or im-
pressions received from sense, are fixed in me-
mory, and pass into it, from the beginning as
whole, e

--- Page 128 ---
106      CONCERNING THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING

...and they pass into it, from the beginning as whole entities. And we have history and experience concerning the same matter, just as also Philosophy and the sciences.

Nor do we think any other partition is necessary for *Theology*. Certainly the informations of oracle and sense differ, both in matter and in the manner of imparting: but the human spirit is one, and its compartments and cells are the same. It happens therefore, as if different liquids, and through different funnels, are received into one and the same vessel. Wherefore also *Theology* consists either of *Sacred History*; or of *Parables*, which are like divine *Poetry*; or of *Precepts and Dogmas*, as a kind of perennial *Philosophy*. For as to that part which seems to be superfluous, namely *Prophecy*, it is a kind of *History*: inasmuch as Divine History excels human [history] in this Prerogative, that Narration can precede the event no less than follow it.

            C H A P. I I.

*Division of History into Natural and Civil, Ecclesiastical and Literary comprehended under Civil. Division of Natural History into the History of Generations, Preter-Generations, and Arts.*

H Istory is either *Natural* or *Civil*: In *Natural* [History], the actions and deeds of Nature are recorded; in *Civil*, those of men. Undoubtedly, *Divine* [matters] shine forth in both, but more

--- Page 129 ---
LIBER II. 107
more in *Civil* [History], so that they even constitute a distinct species of *History*, which we are accustomed to call *Sacred* or *Ecclesiastical*. But to us, the dignity of *Letters* and *Arts* also seems such that a distinct *History* should be separately attributed to them; which we understand to be comprised under *Civil History* (just as *Ecclesiastical* History is).

We undertake the partition of *Natural History* from the state and condition of Nature itself, which is found to exist in a threefold state, and as it were undergoes a triple governance. For either nature is free, explaining itself in its accustomed course, as in the heavens, animals, plants, and the entire apparatus of nature; or it is thrust from its state by the depravities and insolence of stubborn matter, and by the violence of impediments, as in Monsters; or finally, it is constrained and shaped by human art and labor, and as it were renewed, as in artificial things.

Let therefore the partition of *Natural History* be into the *History of Generations*; *Preter-Generations*; and *Arts*; Which last we are also accustomed to call *Mechanical* and *Experimental*. Of these, the first treats the *liberty of nature*, the second its *errors*, the third its *bonds*. We willingly, however, constitute the *history of arts* as a species of natural history: because the opinion has entirely grown old, as if art were something different from nature, artificial things from natural ones: whence that evil, that most
                                 F 4                                people

--- Page 130 ---
108      On the Advancement of Learning.
most writers of natural history think they have discharged
their duty if they have completed a history of animals, or
plants, or minerals, omitting the experiments
of mechanical arts. But another more subtle evil
also creeps into the minds of men; namely, that art is considered
merely as a certain addition to nature, whose power,
of course, is such that it can (indeed) perfect nature that is either incomplete,
or amend it when it is tending towards deterioration, or
free it when it is impeded; but by no means can it entirely
change, transmute, or shake it to its foundations.
This very thing has brought a premature despair to human
affairs. But on the contrary, this ought to have been deeply impressed
upon the minds of men: that artificial things differ from natural ones, not
in form or essence, but only in their efficient cause;
for man, in relation to nature, has power over nothing
except motion, so that he can either move natural bodies towards
or away from something. Therefore, where the moving towards
or moving away of natural bodies is possible, by joining
(as they call it) actives with passives, man can do everything;
where it is not possible, nothing. Nor
does it matter, if things are arranged in order to some
effect, whether this happens through man, or without man.
Gold is sometimes refined by fire, sometimes it is found pure in sand,
nature ministering to itself. The rainbow similarly forms from a dewy cloud on high;
it also forms by the sprinkling of water, here among
us.

--- Page 131 ---
**LIBER II. 109**

here among us. Therefore, nature governs all things: but those three are subordinated; *the course of nature*; *the digression of nature*; and *art*, or man added to things: And therefore, in natural history, it is proper that those three be comprehended; which C. Pliny also did for the most part; who alone embraced natural history with dignity; but having embraced it, he treated it by no means as was fitting, nay rather in unworthy ways.
Of these, the first is considered moderately cultivated: The subsequent two are treated so superficially and uselessly, that they ought to be placed in the class of *desiderata*. For you will not find a sufficiently instructed and rich collection of the works of nature of those things which have deviated and departed from the ordinary course of generations, productions, and motions: whether those be singular offspring of certain regions or places: or unusual events of times: or *the ingenuity of chance* (as he says): or effects of hidden properties: or the unique things of nature in their species. I would not deny that far too many books are found, filled with fabulous experiments, fictitious secrets, and frivolous impostures, for pleasure and novelty: But a serious and severe narration concerning the anomalies and wonders of nature, diligently examined and faithfully described, I do not, I say, find: especially with due rejection and a public, as it were, proscription of falsehoods and fables, which
E 3 value-

--- Page 132 ---
110    ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
have become prevalent. For as the matter now stands, if by chance some falsehoods concerning natural things have gained acceptance and become celebrated (whether because the reverence for antiquity can do so much, or because it is troublesome to subject them again to examination, or because they are indeed thought to be wonderful ornaments of speech, on account of similarities and comparisons), they are never afterwards eradicated or retracted.
    The purpose of this kind of work, which Aristotle adorned with his example, is by no means to gratify curious and empty minds, as wonder-mongers and prodigy-makers do: But for two reasons, both serious and weighty; one, that the unsoundness of axioms may be corrected, which for the most part have their foundation in worn-out and common examples: The other, that a ready and open passage may be made from the wonders of nature to the wonders of art.
    For there is no more difficulty in this matter than that you sagaciously pursue the traces of nature, when she herself spontaneously deviates: so that in this way afterwards, when you wish, you may be able to lead and compel her to the same place. Nor indeed would I prescribe that from this history of wonders, superstitious narratives concerning witchcraft, fascinations, incantations, dreams, divinations, and similar things, should be entirely excluded, where the fact and the event are clearly established.
    Nor has it yet become known, in what matters, and to what extent, effects attributed to superstition,
                                                                 ex

--- Page 133 ---
L I B E R II. 111
participate from natural causes. And therefore, although we rightly deem the use and practice of such arts to be condemned, nevertheless from the speculation and consideration of them (if they are diligently examined) we shall obtain no useless knowledge, not only for rightly judging crimes in this class of offenders, but also for further exploring the secrets of nature. Nor indeed should one hesitate about entering and penetrating into such caves and recesses, if one proposes to oneself the sole inquiry of truth; which Your Majesty has also confirmed by your own example. For you, with those two most clear eyes, of religion and natural philosophy, have wisely and perspicaciously surveyed such shadows, so that you have proven yourself most similar to the Sun, which enters polluted places, yet is not polluted.

However, I would advise that these narratives connected with superstitious matters should be compiled separately, and ought not to be mixed with pure and sincere natural things.

But as for narratives concerning the prodigies and miracles of religions; those are certainly either not true at all, or in no part natural; and therefore do not belong to *natural history*.

As for the *History of nature subdued and artificial*, which we usually call mechanical; I certainly find some collections concerning agriculture, and also concerning several mechanical arts; but, what is most important
                    F 6               in

--- Page 134 ---
112      On the Advancement of Learning
in this kind, experiments familiar and common in individual arts are always neglected and rejected; yet these contribute equally or more to the interpretation of nature than less common ones. For a certain stain seems to be cast upon learning, if perchance learned men submit themselves to the inquiry or observation of mechanical things, unless it be of those things which are considered as secrets of art, or as very rare or subtle things. This vice of such empty and supercilious arrogance, Plato rightly ridiculed, when he introduces the boastful Sophist Hippias disputing with Socrates, a sincere and solid investigator of truth: Who, when the discussion was about beauty, according to his vague and free manner of disputing, first introduced the example of a beautiful maiden, then a beautiful mare, and finally a beautiful and skillfully made earthenware pot. Hippias, moved by this last example, said: "*I would certainly be indignant (unless the consideration of humanity compelled me to it) to dispute with anyone who would adduce such vile and sordid examples.*" To whom Socrates replied, "*Indeed, it suits you so, since you are clothed in such splendid garments and beautiful shoes:*" and other things ironically. Indeed, it can be asserted for certain that grand examples do not provide the best or safest information. This is expressed not foolishly in that well-known fable about the Philosopher: who, when observing the stars

--- Page 135 ---
LIBER II. 113

...with uplifted eyes, fell into the water: For if he had lowered his eyes, he could have immediately seen the stars in the water; but looking up at the sky, he could not see the water in the stars. In the same way, it often happens that small and humble things contribute more to the knowledge of great things than great things to the knowledge of small ones. Indeed, Aristotle rightly observed, *that the nature of anything is best discerned in its smallest parts.* For this reason, he first investigates the nature of the Commonwealth in the family, and in the simplest combinations of society (namely, husband and wife, parents and children, Master and Servant), which occur in any humble dwelling. By a precisely similar reasoning, the nature of this great city (namely, the universe of things) and its administration must be investigated in every primary symbolization and in the smallest portions of things: as we see happens, that secret of nature (held to be most important), concerning the polarity of iron, excited to the poles by the touch of a magnet, revealed itself not in iron bars, but in needles.

But I, if there is any weight to my judgment, thus plainly declare; that the use of *Mechanical History* towards Natural Philosophy is most radical and fundamental. I understand such a Natural Philosophy which does not vanish into the smoke of subtle or sublime speculations; but which operates effectively, towards the advancement of...

--- Page 136 ---
114 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
alleviating the inconveniences of human life. For it will not only help for the present, by connecting and transferring observations of one art to the use of others, and thereby eliciting new conveniences; which must necessarily happen, when experiments of diverse arts come under the observation and consideration of one person; but furthermore, for investigating causes, and deducing the Axioms of the arts, it will light a brighter torch than has ever shone forth hitherto. For just as you would not know or prove someone's character well, unless you provoke him; nor was Proteus accustomed to transform himself into various shapes of things, unless tightly grasped by manacles; similarly, nature, irritated and vexed by art, reveals herself more clearly than when she is freely permitted to herself.
    But before we dismiss this branch of natural history (which we call mechanical and experimental), that must be added; the body of such a history ought to be compiled not only from the mechanical arts themselves, but also from the operative part of the liberal sciences, and at the same time from many Practices (which have not coalesced into an art), so that nothing useful is omitted which helps to inform the understanding. And this is the *first division of natural history.*

                                                                    CHAP.

--- Page 137 ---
LIBER II. 115

C H A P. III.

*Second Division of Natural History, according to its Use &*
*End, into Narrative & Inductive. And*
*that the noblest End of Natural History is, that it*
*may minister & be in order for founding Philoso-*
*phy, which End the Inductive History regards. Division*
*of the History of Generations into the History of Celes-*
*tial Bodies: the History of Meteors: the History of the Globe*
*of Earth & Sea: the History of Masses or*
*Greater Collections: & the History of Species*
*or Lesser Collections.*

[Large initial H] *Natural History, as it is threefold in Subject*
*(as we have said), so it is twofold in Use:*
For it is employed either for the *Knowledge of the things themselves*, which are committed to history; or as *the primary Material of Philosophy*. And that former kind, which either delights with the pleasantness of *Narrations*, or aids with the utility of *Experiments*, and has been sought for the sake of such pleasure or fruit, is to be considered of a far inferior rank, compared to that which may be the forest and furniture for true and legitimate *Induction*, and may offer the first nourishment to Philosophy. Therefore, we again divide *natural history into Narrative and Inductive:* And this latter we place among the *Desiderata*. Nor indeed should the keenness of anyone's mind be dazzled by the great names of the ancients, or the great volumes of the moderns. For we know well enough that natural history is considered ample in bulk, pleasing in variety, and abundant in dili-

--- Page 138 ---
116 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
often curious. However, if anyone were to remove from it fables, and antiquity, and citations of authors, and empty controversies, finally philology, and embellishments (which are suited rather to *convivial discourses* and the *nights of learned men* than to establishing philosophy), the matter would amount to nothing great. But it is certainly far removed from that history which we have in mind.

For first, those two parts of *natural history* are wanting (about which we just spoke): *Preter-Generations* and *Arts*, in which we place great importance. Then, in that third (which remains) general part, namely concerning *Generations*, it satisfies only one of its five parts.

For indeed, five subordinate parts are constituted for the *History of Generations*. The first is of *Celestial Bodies*, which embraces the pure Phenomena themselves, and is separate from dogmas. The second is of *Meteors* (including also Comets) and of the *Regions*, which they call, of the *Air*. For neither concerning Comets, fiery Meteors, Winds, Rains, Storms, and the rest, is any History found which is of any value. The third is of *Earth & Sea* (insofar as they are Integral Parts of the Universe): of mountains, Rivers, Tides, Sands, Forests, Islands, finally, of the Figure itself of the continents as they extend; in all these, by inquiring into and observing natural things rather than cosmographical ones.
                                                     Four-

--- Page 139 ---
L I B E R II.          117
Fourthly, concerning the common Masses of Matter,
which we call Major Colleges. (commonly
called Elements.) For no accounts are found
concerning Fire, Air, Water, Earth, and their Natures, Mo-
tions, Operations, Impressions, which constitute
a proper body of History. Fifthly, and lastly,
concerning the exquisite Collections of Matter,
which by us are called Minor Colleges, commonly Species.
But in this last part alone, the industry of writers
has shone; yet in such a way that it has rather
luxuriated in superfluities (swelling with Images
of Animals or Plants, and similar things) than
been enriched by solid and diligent ob-
servations, which ought everywhere to be appended
in *Natural History*. And, to speak in a word,
all *Natural History* that we have, both in its
inquiry and its collection, is in no way adapted
to that end which we have mentioned (namely,
the founding of *Philosophy*). Therefore we declare
that an *inductive History* is wanting. And so much for
*Natural History*.

C A P. IV.

*Division of Civil History, into Ecclesiastical, Literary,*
*and (that which retains the name of the Genus) Civil:*
*and that Literary History is wanting. Precepts for compiling it.*

[Large initial H] *istory Civil* we think is rightly
divided into three species: First, *Sacred*, or
                                          Ecclesia-

--- Page 140 ---
118 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
Ecclesiastical: then that which retains the name of the genus, Civil: Lastly, of Letters and Arts. We will begin, however, with that Species which we placed last, because the other two are extant, but it seemed good to classify that one among the *Desiderata*. That is the *History of Letters*. And certainly the History of the World, if it should be destitute of this part, could not be considered unlike the *Statue of Polyphemus*, with its eye gouged out; since that part of the image is missing which most represents the genius and character of the Person. Although we establish that this is desired, it nevertheless by no means escapes us that in the particular Sciences of Jurists, Mathematicians, Rhetoricians, Philosophers, some slight mention is made, or certain meager narratives exist, concerning the Sects, Schools, Books, Authors, and Successions of such Sciences: Also, some meager and unfruitful treatises are found concerning the Inventors of Things and Arts; Nevertheless, we assert that no just and universal History of Letters has yet been published. Therefore, we will propose its Subject Matter, and Method of composition, and Use. The *Subject Matter* is nothing other than that it should be recalled from all memory, what Doctrines and Arts flourished in which ages and Regions of the World. Their Antiquities, progresses, also their wanderings through different parts of the World (for Sciences migrate, no less than peoples), again their declines, oblivions, restora-

--- Page 141 ---
[leaf ornament] B O O K II. 119
and restorations be commemorated. Let there be
observed at the same time for each Art, the oc-
casion and origin of invention; the custom and method of teaching; the cu-
ltivating and practicing method and institutions. Let there also be
added the Sects, and the mo-
st famous Controversies, which occupied learned men; the Slanders, to which they were exposed; the Praises
and honors with which they were adorned. Let there be noted
the principal Authors, the more excellent books,
Schools, Successions, Academies, Societies,
Colleges, Orders, finally, everything that pertains to
the State of Letters. Above all, et-
iam we wish this to be done (which is the glory of Civil History,
and as it were its soul) that causes
be coupled with events: namely, that there be men-
tioned the Natures of regions and peoples; and their dispo-
sitions apt and suitable, or inept and unsuit-
able for diverse disciplines; the Accidents of ti-
mes, which were adverse or propitious to the Sciences;
the Zeal and mixtures of Religions; the Ma-
lice and favors of Laws; finally, the no-
table Virtues, and the efficacy of certain men, to-
wards promoting letters; and similar things. But these
all we instruct to be treated in such a way that time is not spent, in the manner of Cri-
tics, in praise and censure; but that the things themselves be narra-
ted purely historically, and judgment be more sparingly interposed.
   Concerning the Method of composing such a History,
however, we first warn this, that its ma-
terial and supply be sought not only from Histories
and Critics, but also through each
                                                     anno-

--- Page 142 ---
120      ON THE AUGMENTATION OF THE SCIENCES.
...centuries of years, or even smaller inter-
vals, in sequence (beginning from the remotest Antiquity),
the principal books which were written in that space of
time should be consulted; so that from their not full reading
(for that would be something infinite), but from a sampling
and observation of the Argument, Style, Me-
thod, the literary Genius of that time,
as if by a kind of incantation, may be called forth from the dead.

   As for the *Use*, these things aim at this:
not that the honor and pomp of Letters may be celebrated through so many
surrounding images; nor because, out of the most ardent
love with which we pursue letters, we desire to inquire into,
and know, and preserve everything that in any way pertains
to their state, even to the point of curiosity: but
principally for a more serious and weighty reason: This
is (to speak in a word) because we believe that through
such a Narrative as we have described, a very great
addition can be made to the prudence and sagacity of learned
men in the use and administration of Doctrine;
and that the movements and disturbances, and the
vices and virtues, of intellectual matters, no less than Civil ones,
can be noted; and that from this the best Governance
can be drawn out and established. For we do not think
that the works of Blessed Augustine or Blessed Ambrose can
contribute as much to the prudence of a Bishop or a Theologian,
as if Ecclesiastical History is diligently inspected,
                                             & re-

--- Page 143 ---
L I B E R II.        121
and thoroughly examined. Which we do not doubt will become apparent to learned men from the *History of Literature*. For that which is not supported by examples and the memory of things is entirely subject to chance and exposed to rashness. And so much for the *History of Literature*.

C A P. V.

*Concerning the Dignity and Difficulty of Civil History.*

**T**here follows *Civil History* in particular, whose dignity and authority stand out among human writings. For to its trust are committed the examples of our ancestors, the vicissitudes of things, the foundations of Civil Prudence, and finally the name and fame of men. To the dignity of the subject is added no less difficulty. For to draw back the mind in writing to past events, and as it were to make it ancient; to diligently scrutinize the movements of times, the characters of persons, the hesitations of counsels, the courses of actions (as of waters), the inner workings of pretexts, the secrets of empire; to relate them with fidelity and freedom; and finally, to place them before the eyes with the light of words, is certainly a work of great labor and judgment; especially since older matters are found to be uncertain, and more recent ones exposed to danger. For this reason, many faults also surround this Civil History: while most people [produce] certain meager narratives, and ple-

--- Page 144 ---
122      DE AUGM. SCIENT.
and common, and plainly disgraceful histories they write;
others patch together particular accounts and small
commentaries with hurried work and in an uneven style;
others only skim the main points of events, while others, on
the contrary, pursue every smallest detail, and things
contributing nothing to the main actions; some, with
excessive indulgence towards their own talents, boldly
invent many things; but others impress upon events not so
much the image of their own talents as that of their
passions, and add things, mindful of their own parties,
being witnesses little faithful to the facts: some everywhere
inculcate politics, in which they take pleasure, and seeking
digressions for ostentation, too lightly interrupt the
narration of events: others are excessive in the prolixity
of speeches, and sermons, or even of the acts themselves,
with little judgment; so that it is sufficiently clear that
nothing is found more rarely among the writings of men
than a legitimate history, perfect in all its parts. But we at
present are instituting a division of doctrines, so that things
may be omitted; not a censure, so that faults may be noted.
Now we will pursue the divisions of *Civil History*, and those
of different kinds: For the Species will be less entangled if
diverse divisions are proposed, than if one division is
curiously drawn out through its members.

                                  CAP.

--- Page 145 ---
L I B E R II. 123

C A P. VI.

*First Division of Civil History, into Memoirs, An-*
*tiquities, & Just History.*

[Large decorative initial H] ISTORY *Civil* is tripartite, not unlike three
kinds of paintings or images. For we see
from paintings and images, some imperfect, as
those to which the final touch has not been applied;
others perfect, others indeed mutilated and deformed
by age. Similarly, we will divide *Civil History* (which
is a kind of image of things and times) into three
species, corresponding to those of paintings; namely,
*Memoirs*; *Just History*; and *Antiquities*. *Memoirs*
are *History begun*, or the first and rough outlines
of *History*; *Antiquities* indeed are *deformed History*,
or the remnants of *History*, which by chance have
been snatched from the shipwreck of time.
   *Memoirs*, or preparations for *History*, are of two
kinds; one of which it pleases us to call *Commentaries*,
the other *Registers*. *Commentaries* present a bare
series and connection of actions and events, omitting
the causes and pretexts of things, also their beginnings
and occasions, likewise counsels and speeches, and the
rest of the apparatus of *Actions*. For such is the proper
nature of *Commentaries*: although to *Caesar*, through
a certain modesty combined with magnanimity
                                  con-

--- Page 146 ---
124      Oɴ ᴛʜᴇ Aᴅᴠᴀɴᴄᴇᴍᴇɴᴛ ᴏғ Lᴇᴀʀɴɪɴɢ
combined, it has pleased to give the name of Commentaries to the most excellent among the Histories that exist. But *Registers* are of a twofold nature: For they comprise either *Titles of Things & Persons, in a series of times;* such as are called *Fasti, & Chronology:* Or *Solemnities of Acts;* of which kind are, Princes' *Edicts, Decrees of Senates, Processes of Judgments,* speeches publicly delivered, letters publicly sent, & similar things, without the context of narration, or a continuous thread.
      *Antiquities,* or *Relics of Histories,* are (as we have already said) like the planks of a shipwreck, when the memory of things is failing, and almost submerged; nevertheless industrious, & sagacious men, with a certain persistent, & scrupulous diligence, from genealogies, fasti, titles, monuments, coins, proper names & styles, etymologies of words, proverbs, traditions, Archives & instruments both public and private, fragments of Histories, scattered passages of books by no means Historical; from these, I say, all or some, they snatch some things from the deluge of time, & preserve them. A truly laborious task, but pleasing to mortals, & combined with a certain reverence; and certainly worthy, that, with the fabulous origins of nations deleted, it should be substituted in place of such fictitious accounts; but nevertheless having less Authority, because of the license of a few.

--- Page 147 ---
LIBER II. 125
is subjected to the license of a few, which few care about.
In these kinds of *Imperfect History*, I do not think any defect should be pointed out, since they are, as it were, *Imperfectly Compounded*, so that a defect of this kind is from their very Nature. As for *Epitomes* (indeed the woodworms and moths of Histories), we wish them to be banished; which we do also with very many who were of the soundest judgment; inasmuch as they have eaten away and corroded many bodies of the noblest Histories, and finally reduced them to useless dregs.

CAP VII.
*Division of Just History into Chronicles, Lives, & Relations; and an explanation of those parts.*

[Large decorative initial A]T *Just History* is of three kinds, according to the nature of the *Object* which it proposes to represent. For either it represents some *Portion* of time; or a singular *Person* worthy of memory; or some *Action* or *deed* from among the more illustrious. The first we call *Chronicles* or *Annals*; the second, *Lives*; the third, *Relations*. Among these, *Chronicles* seem to excel in renown and name; *Lives*, however, in benefit and examples; *Relations*, again, in sincerity and truth. For *Chronicles* propose the scope of public actions, and the external aspects of persons, and those turned towards the public; Minor
G matters,

--- Page 148 ---
126      OF THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
but minor things, which pertain both to affairs and to persons, they omit and wrap in silence. But since it is characteristic of divine art to suspend the greatest from the smallest, it often happens that history of this kind, having pursued only the greater things, shows rather the pomp and solemnities of affairs than their true origins and more subtle textures; furthermore, even if it adds and intermingles the counsels themselves, nevertheless, delighting in grandeur, it sprinkles upon human actions more gravity and prudence than they truly possess; so that some Satire can be a truer picture of human life than some of these kinds of Histories. On the contrary, Lives, if they are written diligently and with judgment (for we are not speaking of Elogies, and such barren Commemorations), since they propose a single Person as their Subject, in whom it is necessary for actions, no less trivial than grave, small than great, private than public, to be composed and intermingled; they certainly exhibit more vivid and faithful narratives of events, and which you can transfer to example more safely and happily. But special Relations of Actions (such as the Peloponnesian War, the Expedition of Cyrus, the Conspiracy of Catiline, and similar things) it is altogether fitting that they be clothed in a purer and more sincere candor of truth than the just Histories of times; because in them an argument can be chosen and taken that is suitable and definite; and of such a kind, that concerning it, know-

--- Page 149 ---
L I B E R II. 127
knowledge, and good certainty, and full information can be had, whereas, on the contrary, the *History* of a period (especially one which is much older than the age of the writer) necessarily often fails in the memory of events, and contains, as it were, empty spaces; which have been accustomed to be filled and supplied quite freely by ingenuity and conjecture. This very thing, however, which we say concerning the sincerity of *Relations*, must be understood with an exception. For it must certainly be confessed (since all human things are imperfect in part, and advantages are almost perpetually conjoined with disadvantages) that relations of this kind, especially if they are published at the very time of the events, (since they are often written either for favor or for ill-will,) are deservedly the most suspect of all narratives. But again, to this disadvantage is also born that remedy; that those very *Relations*, since not only from one side, but according to factions, and part

--- Page 150 ---
128      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
particular ones (we speak of such as could exist) of some dignity, or even mediocrity, have hitherto been omitted, to the great detriment of the honor and name of the Kingdoms and Commonwealths to which they are due, and which it would be too long to enumerate. But leaving the Histories of foreign Nations to the care of foreigners (*lest perchance I be curious in another's Commonwealth*), I cannot but complain before Your Majesty about the vileness and unworthiness of the History of England, which is now extant, as far as its entire body is concerned; and also about the injustice and bias of the History of Scotland, as far as its most recent and prolific author is concerned: Reflecting that it would be very honorable to Your Majesty, and a work most pleasing to posterity, if, just as this island of Great Britain now transmits itself, united into one Monarchy, to succeeding ages, so it were recounted in one history, from past ages; in the same way that Sacred Scripture deduces the history of the ten Tribes of the Kingdom of Judah, as if a twin. But if the bulk of such a history, certainly great and arduous, should seem likely to hinder its being written accurately and with dignity, behold for you a memorable period of much narrower time, as far as the History of England is concerned, namely from the Union of the Roses to the Union of the Kingdoms; a space of time which, in my judgment, contains a greater number of events,
                                                            which

--- Page 151 ---
L I B E R II. 129
which rarely show themselves, [and] a variety, than one might anywhere discover in an equal number of successions in a Hereditary Kingdom. For it begins with the acquisition of a mixed Crown, partly by Arms, partly by Right: Indeed, the sword opened the way, marriages brought stability; Therefore, times followed consistent with those beginnings; very similar to waves which, after a great storm, retain their swells and agitations, but without any immense tempest, and which were overcome by the prudence of the ruler, who alone among the preceding Kings excelled in counsel. Next in order succeeded a King, whose actions, although administered more by impulse than by counsel, nevertheless brought no small momentum to European Affairs, by balancing and inclining them in turn, as they themselves tended. Also, during his reign, that immense change in the Ecclesiastical State began to occur, such as very rarely appears on the stage. A minor King followed. Then an attempt at Tyranny, although it was very brief, like an ephemeral fever. Then the Reign of a Woman, married to a foreign King. Again the Reign of a solitary and unmarried Woman. Finally, all these were succeeded by that auspicious and glorious event; namely, the union of this Island of Britain, divided from the whole world, within itself; through which that ancient oracle, given to Aeneas, which foretold rest for him,
—— *Seek out your ancient mother;*
        G 3

--- Page 152 ---
130          On the Augmentation of Sciences.
above the most noble Nations of England and Scotland,
in that name of *Britannia*, *its Ancient Mo-*
*ther*, now coming together, may it be fulfilled; as a
pledge and token of the goal, and of the end of errors
and wandering now found. So that, just as
heavy bodies, when thrown, experience certain
tremors before they settle and come to rest; in the same
way it seems probable, that it was done by Divine
Providence, that this Monarchy, before it settled
and was confirmed in your Majesty, and your Royal
Offspring, (in whom I hope it will be established
forever) should undergo these so many varied changes,
and vicissitudes, as preludes to its stability.
     Thinking about *Lives*, a certain wonder
arises, that these times of ours do not know their
own good; since the commemoration and writing
of the lives of those who were famous in our age
is so rare. For although Kings, and those who hold
absolute Sovereignty, may be few; also Princes
in a free Republic (with so many Republics converted
into Monarchy) are not many; nevertheless, there
have not been wanting excellent Men (even under
Kings) who deserve better than an uncertain and vague
fame of their memory, or dry and barren eulogies.
For in this respect, the invention of one of the more
recent Poets, by which he enriched an ancient fable,
is not inelegant. He imagines, at the end of the
Fates' thread, a certain coin,
                                                                      or

--- Page 153 ---
L I B E R II. 131
or a necklace to hang, on which the name of the deceased is impressed: But Time awaits Atropos' knife, and as soon as the thread is cut, snatches away the coins, and having carried them away, a little later casts them from his bosom into the river Lethe: But around the river, a great host of birds fly, which seize the coins, and after they have carried them around for a little while in their beaks, a little later allow them to fall into the river through carelessness: But among them, some swans are found, who, if they seized any coin with a name, immediately used to carry it to a certain temple consecrated to immortality. Such swans, therefore, have almost disappeared in our times. Although, however, very many men, whose cares and pursuits make them more mortal than their bodies, despise the memory of their name as smoke or a breath of air,

[Horizontal line]

—— Souls devoid of any great praise;
Whose philosophy and severity, namely, springs from this root: "We did not despise praises before we ceased to do praiseworthy things;" This, however, will not prejudice us in the judgment of Solomon: "The memory of the just is with praises, but the name of the wicked rots;" The former flourishes perpetually, the latter either immediately passes into oblivion or rots into a foul stench. And therefore, in that very style, or form of speaking, which has been very rightly received,
                               G 4.                as

--- Page 154 ---
132      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
that it may be attributed to the deceased, (*Of happy memory*, *of pious*
*memory*, *of good memory*) we seem to recognize
that which Cicero (having borrowed it himself from Demosthenes)
uttered, *Good fame is the proper possession of the deceased*.
Which possession indeed I cannot but note,
in our age for the most part lies uncultivated and neglected.

As for *Relations* (or Accounts), it would be entirely desirable
that much greater diligence be applied to them.
Indeed, hardly any more illustrious action occurs,
in which some pen of the better sort is not involved,
which could record and describe it. Since, however, it
must be the work of very few men to write a just History
with due dignity (as is clear enough from the scarcity
even of mediocre Historians), therefore,
if particular actions, at the very time
they are performed, were committed to memory by some
tolerable writing, it would be hoped that someday
there would arise those who could write a just History,
with the help and aid of those *Relations*.
For these could be like a nursery, from which, when there is need,
a large and magnificent garden might be brought forth.

                                                                    CAP.

--- Page 155 ---
**BOOK II. 133**

**C H A P. VIII.**

*Division of the History of Times, into Universal*
*and Particular History, and the Advantages*
*and Disadvantages of each.*

The History of Times is either Universal
or Particular; The latter embraces the deeds
of some Kingdom, or Republic, or Nation,
the former those of the Whole World. Nor indeed have
there been wanting those who wish to appear to have
written the History of the World even from its Origin;
presenting a jumble of things, and abridgements of
narratives, instead of History: Others have been confident
that they could embrace the memorable events of their
own time, throughout the whole world, as a proper
History, an attempt certainly magnanimous, and with
no small fruit. For human affairs are not so divided
by Empires or Regions, that they do not have many
things connected; Wherefore it is certainly helpful to
view the destinies appointed to any age or era, as if
contained and described on a single tablet. It also
happens that many writings not to be scorned (such
as those Reports, of which we spoke before), which
might otherwise perhaps perish, and not often to
undergo printing, or at least their main points, are
received into such a General History, and in this way
are fixed and preserved. Nevertheless, if one considers
the matter more correctly, one will notice that the
Laws of a proper History are so severe, that to exercise

--- Page 156 ---
134      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
...it is scarcely permissible to exercise them; so much so that the Majesty of History is rather diminished by the grandeur of its bulk, than amplified. For it will happen that he who pursues so many varied things from all sides, with the scrupulousness of information gradually relaxed, and his diligence, which extends to so many matters, languishing in individual instances, will catch popular ears and rumors; and from relations not very authentic, or some such trivial material, will compose history. Moreover, it will be necessary for him (lest the work grow to an immense size) to deliberately omit many things worthy of relation, and to often descend to the methods of epitomes. Another not small danger also arises, and one diametrically opposed to the utility of universal history. For just as universal history preserves some narratives which otherwise perhaps would have perished; so on the contrary, it very often destroys other sufficiently fruitful narratives, which would have otherwise survived, because of the summaries of things pleasing to mortals.

            CHAPTER IX.
Another Division of the History of Times, into Annals, &
            Journals.

Also the History of Times is rightly divided into Annals, & Journals: Which division, although it takes its names from periods of time, nevertheless also pertains to the selection of matters. For rightly Cornelius Tacitus, when he came to mention the Magnificence of certain structures.

--- Page 157 ---
**BOOK II. 135**
he rarely mentions it, immediately adding, '*It was found to be in keeping with the dignity of the Roman people to commit illustrious matters to the Annals, and such things to the daily acts of the city:*' Applying to the *Annals* matters which pertain to the *State of the Republic*; but the lighter *Acts* and *Occurrences* to the *Diaries*. In my judgment, at any rate, it would be fitting for a certain heraldic discipline to prevail, in arranging the dignities no less of books than of persons. For just as nothing detracts more from *Civil Affairs* than the confusion of Orders and Ranks; so also it detracts not a little from the authority of serious history, if matters of lesser moment are mixed with *Politics*; such as pomp, and solemnities, and spectacles, and things of this kind. And indeed it would be desirable that that very distinction should come into common practice. In our times, however, *Diaries* are only in use for voyages and military expeditions. Among the Ancients, certainly, it was given to the honor of Kings that the acts of their Palace should be recorded in *Diaries*; which we see was done under *Ahasuerus, King of the Persians*; who, when he spent a sleepless night, called for the *Diaries*; where he recognized the conspiracy of the Eunuchs: But in *Alexander's Diaries,* such trivial matters were contained, that even if he happened to fall asleep at the table, it would be recorded in the acts: For neither did *Annals* only comprise weighty matters, nor *Diaries* only light ones; but all things indiscriminately and cursorily were received into *Diaries*, whether of greater or lesser moment.
G 6 CHAP.

[Marginal note on the left: a small handwritten mark, possibly a letter or flourish.]

--- Page 158 ---
136 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.

C H A P. X.

*Second Division of Civil History, into Pure,*
*& Mixed.*

THE last division of Civil History, however, is that it be divided into Pure, or Mixed. There are two notable mixtures. One from Civil Science. The other principally from Natural [Science]. For a kind of writing has been introduced by some, that one should compile certain narratives, not continued in the series of history, but selected by the author's choice: then recall them, and as it were, ruminate upon them; and taking occasion from them, discourse on Political matters. Which kind of *ruminated history* we indeed greatly approve, provided that such a writer does this, and confesses that he is doing this. But to one writing *just* history professionally, to insert politics everywhere, and by those means to interrupt the thread of history, is something untimely and troublesome. For although every more prudent history may be, as it were, impregnated with political precepts and warnings, yet the writer himself ought not to act as his own midwife.
Also mixed is *Cosmographical history*, and that in many ways: For it has from *Natural history*, the Regions themselves, and their *Sites*, and *Fruits*; From *Civil history*, *Cities*, *Empires*, *Customs*: From *Mathematics*, *Climates*, and *Configurations of the Heavens*, by which the tracts of the world

--- Page 159 ---
LIBER II. 137
are subject to. It is in this kind of *History*, or Science, that we have cause to congratulate our age. For in this our age, the globe of the earth has been remarkably opened up and made accessible. The Ancients certainly knew the Zones and Antipodes,
( *And where the rising sun with panting horses first breathed upon us,*
*There the late reddening evening kindles its lights.* )
And this very knowledge more through demonstrations than through travels. But that some small *Keel* should emulate heaven itself; and should have circled the entire terrestrial globe with a journey even more oblique and winding than celestial bodies are accustomed to, that is the prerogative of our age: so that the present age can rightly adopt in its motto, not only that *Plus ultra* (Further beyond), where the Ancients adopted *Non ultra* (No further); and moreover that *Imitable lightning*, where the Ancients (adopted) *Non-imitable lightning*;
( *Madman who (imitates) clouds, and non-imitable lightning;* )
but also that, which surpasses all admiration, *Imitable Heaven*; on account of our navigations, by which it has often been granted to be rolled and carried around the entire circuit of the earth, in the manner of celestial bodies.
And this splendid success in nautical matters and in exploring the Globe can create great hope concerning even further progress and Augmentations of the Sciences; especially

--- Page 160 ---
138          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
tim since it seems to have been decreed by divine Counsel that these two things should be coeval: For thus Daniel the Prophet, speaking of the last times, foretells, *Many shall pass through, and knowledge shall be increased*; as if the passing through, or exploration of the world, and the manifold Augmentation of the Sciences, were destined for the same age: As we now see largely accomplished; inasmuch as our times, in learning, do not much yield to those two earlier periods or revolutions of doctrines (one among the Greeks, the other among the Romans), but rather in some things far surpass them.

C H A P. XI.

*Partition of Ecclesiastical history, into special Ecclesiastical history, history pertaining to Prophecies, & history of Nemesis.*

[Large initial H]*Ecclesiastical history* in general undergoes almost the same divisions as *Civil history*. For there are *Ecclesiastical Chronicles*, there are *lives of the Fathers*, there are *Relations concerning Synods*, & other things pertaining to the Church. But properly speaking, it is rightly divided into *Ecclesiastical history* (the generic name being retained), & *history pertaining to Prophecies*, & *history of Nemesis or Providence*. The first commemorates the *times* & *diverse state of the Church Militant*: whether it fluctuates, like the *Ark in the deluge*: or journeys, like the *Ark in the wilderness*: or stands still, like the *Ark*—

--- Page 161 ---
            BOOK II.           139
as the _Ark_ in the temple: that is, the state of the _Church_
in persecution, in movement, and in peace. In this
part, I find no defect, but rather that many things
are present in it than are lacking: I would certainly
wish that to so great a mass, the quality and sincerity
of the narratives would also correspond.
   The second part, which is the _history relating to Prophecies_,
consists of two Relatives, the _Prophecy itself_, and its
_Fulfillment_. Therefore, such ought to be the design of this
work, that with each of the _Prophecies_ from the scriptures,
the truth of events may be joined; and this through all ages
of the world, both for the confirmation of faith, and
for establishing a certain discipline and skill, in the
interpretation of _Prophecies_, which still remain to be
fulfilled. Nevertheless, in this matter, that latitude must
be admitted, which is proper and familiar to Divine prophecies;
that their fulfillments may occur, both continuously and
punctually

--- Page 162 ---
140 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
The Third Part, which is the *History of Nemesis*,
has indeed fallen into the pens of some pious men, but not without partisan bias: it is occupied, however, in observing that divine congruence which sometimes intervenes between God's Revealed Will and His Secret Will. For although the Counsels and Judgments of God are so obscure that they are utterly inscrutable to the *natural man*, and indeed often withdraw themselves from the eyes of those who look forth from the tabernacle; nevertheless, it has seemed good to Divine Wisdom, sometimes at turns, for the confirmation of His own, and the confusion of those who are, as it were, without God in the world, to propose these things, as if written in larger characters, thus to be seen, so that (as the Prophet speaks) *anyone may read them even in running*; that is, that merely sensual and pleasure-seeking men, who hasten to pass by those divine Judgments, and never fix their thoughts upon them, nevertheless, although they run quickly and are doing something else, are compelled to acknowledge them. Such are late and unexpected vengeances; sudden and unhoped-for salvations; divine counsels, through tortuous windings of things and amazing spirals, at last clearly unfolding themselves; and similar things: which are powerful, not only for comforting the minds of the faithful, but for striking and convincing the consciences of the wicked.

CHAP.

--- Page 163 ---
LIBER II. 141

CAP. XII.

*On the Appendices of history: which concern the Words of men (just as history itself concerns facts): Their division into letters, and apophthegms.*

But not only of the deeds of the human race, but also of its sayings, memory ought to be preserved. Nor is there any doubt, however, that those sayings are sometimes inserted into history itself, insofar as they clearly and weightily contribute to and serve the narration of events. But sayings or *Human* words are properly preserved by *Books of Orations, Letters, and Apophthegms.*

And indeed, the Orations of prudent men, delivered on grave and arduous affairs and causes, are very valuable both for the knowledge of the matters themselves and for eloquence. But even greater aids are provided for instructing civil prudence by *Letters*, which have been sent by great men concerning serious affairs. For from the words of men, nothing is sounder or more excellent than *Letters* of this kind. For they have more native sense than Orations; and also more maturity than sudden conversations. The same, when continued according to a series of times, (as happens in those which are sent by *Legates, Governors of Provinces, & other Ministers of the Empire, to Kings, or Senates, or their other Superiors; or conversely*

--- Page 164 ---
142 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
(and conversely from Rulers to ministers,) are
certainly, for *history*, above all, a most precious
store. Nor do *Apophthegms* themselves serve
only for delight and ornament, but also for the
conduct of affairs, and civil uses. For they are
(as he used to say) like *Axes* or *Spear-points of
Words*, which cut and penetrate the knots of
things and affairs with a certain sharpness: But
occasions return in a cycle, and what was once
useful, can again be applied and be profitable;
whether one brings them forth as one's own, or
as ancient. Nor indeed can there be any doubt
about the utility of this matter for civil affairs,
which Caesar the Dictator honored with his own
work; would that his Book were extant, since
those things which are anywhere found in this
kind, seem to us to be collected with too little
selection.
    And let these things have been said concerning
*History*, that part of Doctrine, namely, which
corresponds to one of the Cells, or *Mansions of the
Intellect*, which is *Memory*.

C H A P. XIII.

*Concerning the second principal Member of Doctrine, namely*
*Poesy. The Partition of Poesy into Narrative, Drama-*
*tic, & Parabolic. Three Examples of Parabolic Poesy*
*are proposed.*

NOW let us come to *Poesy*. *Poesy* is a kind
of doctrine, for the most part bound by words,
but free and licentious in matter; Therefore, as at the
                                                                      begin-

--- Page 165 ---
LIBER II. 143

we said, is referred to *Imagination*, which
is accustomed to invent and contrive altogether
unjust and illicit conjunctions and separations of things.
*Poetry*, however (as we hinted above), is understood in a twofold
sense, inasmuch as it regards *Words*, or
inasmuch as it regards *Things*. In the former sense, it is a certain *Character*
of *Discourse*: for *Verse* is a kind of style,
and a certain formula of elocution,
nor does it pertain to things: for both true narration
can be written in verse, and a fictitious story in prose.
But in the latter sense, we established
it, from the beginning, as a *Principal Member of Doctrine*,
and we have placed it next to *history*,
since it is nothing else than an *Imitation of History*
*at Pleasure*. We, therefore, in our divisions,
investigating and pursuing the true veins of doctrines;
and not yielding to received custom and divisions (in many things);
we remove *Satires*, and *Elegies*, and *Epigrams*, and *Odes*, and such
from the established discourse;
and refer them to philosophy and the arts of oration.
But under the name of *Poetry*, we treat only
of *History invented at Pleasure*.
The division of *Poetry*, most true, and especially
from its proper nature, besides those Divisions which
are common to it with *History*, (for there are
*fictitious Chronicles*, *fictitious Lives*, *fictitious Relations* also)
is this, that it is either *Narrative*; or *Dramatic*;
or *Parabolic*. *Narrative* altogether
imitates history, so as almost to deceive, except that
things

--- Page 166 ---
144      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
it often exaggerates things beyond belief. *Dramatic*
is like a visible history; for it constitutes
an image of things as if present; history,
however, as if past. *Parabolic*,
however, is history with a type, which brings Intellectual
things down to the senses.
   And concerning *Narrative Poetry*, whether it
pleases to call it *Heroic*, provided you understand this
concerning the *Matter*, not the *Verse*, it seems to be
raised from an altogether noble foundation, which pertains
primarily to the dignity of human nature.
For since the sensible world is inferior in
dignity to the rational soul, this *Poetry* seems to
bestow upon human Nature what History denies;
and in some way to satisfy the mind with shadows of things,
when solid things cannot be had.
For if anyone looks into the matter more acutely, a
firm argument is drawn from *Poetry*, that a more
illustrious greatness of things, a more perfect order,
and a more beautiful variety, please the human soul,
than it can in any way find in nature itself, after the Fall.
Therefore, since deeds and events, which are
subject to true history, are not of such magnitude
in which the human soul may satisfy itself, *Poetry*
is at hand, which invents more Heroic deeds:
Since true history narrates the successes of things
by no means according to the merits of Virtues
and Crimes; *Poetry* corrects it, and exhibits
outcomes and fortunes, according to merits, and
by the law of Nemesis: Since
                                                     true,

--- Page 167 ---
LIBER II. 145
(true history), by the obvious satiety and similarity of things, becomes a weariness to the human soul; Poetry refreshes it, singing of things unexpected, varied, and full of changes. So much so that this Poetry contributes not only to delight, but also to greatness of soul and to morals. Wherefore and deservedly it can even seem to partake of some divinity; because it raises the soul and snatches it to the sublime; by accommodating the images of things to the soul's desires, not by submitting the soul to things (which reason and history do). And by these allurements, and by the suitability with which it soothes the human soul, with the added companionship of Music (whence it can be more sweetly insinuated), it opened a way for itself, so that it was held in honor even in plainly rude ages, and among barbarous nations, when other Doctrines were entirely excluded.

Dramatic Poetry, however, which has the Theater as its world, is excellent in use, if it were sound. For not small could be the Theater's Discipline and Corruption: And of Corruptions, in this kind, there is abundance; discipline is plainly neglected in our times. Nevertheless, although in modern Republics theatrical action is held as a trivial thing, unless perhaps it draws too much from Satire and bites; yet among the Ancients it was a concern that it should instruct the minds of men towards virtue. Moreover, by prudent men and great Philosophers, it was considered as a kind of plectrum for the soul. And indeed

--- Page 168 ---
146 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
indeed it is most true, and as a certain Secret of Nature, that the minds of men, when they are gathered together, are more open to affections and impressions than when they are alone.

But *Parabolic Poetry* stands out among the rest, and seems like a sacred and august thing; especially since Religion itself very often uses its agency, and through it carries on the commerce of divine things with human. Nevertheless, this also is found to be corrupted by the levity and indulgence of intellects concerning Allegories. Its use, however, is ambiguous, and it is applied to contrary purposes. For it serves for *Envelopment*; it also serves for *Illustration*. In the latter, a certain *Method of Teaching*; in the former, an *Artifice of Concealing* seems to be sought. This *Method of Teaching*, however, which serves for *Illustration*, was very much used in ancient centuries. For since the inventions and conclusions of human reason (even those which are now trite and common) were at that time new and unaccustomed, human intellects scarcely grasped that subtlety, unless they were brought nearer to the senses through such images and examples. Wherefore all things among them were full of all kinds of fables, and Parables, and Enigmas, and similitudes. Hence the symbols of Pythagoras, the Enigmas of the Sphinx, the Fables of Aesop, and similar things. Moreover, the Apophthegms of the ancient Sages almost always demonstrated the matter through similitudes. Hence Menenius Agrippa
                                                                    among

--- Page 169 ---
LIBER II. 147
among the Romans (a people in that age very
unlettered) a fable suppressed sedition. Finally,
as hieroglyphs were older than letters, so parables
were older than arguments. And even today and
always, the power of parables has been and is
outstanding, since neither arguments can be so clear,
nor true examples so apt.
   There is another use of *Parabolic Poetry*, almost
contrary to the former, which serves (as we said) for
*Covering*; namely, of those things whose dignity
deserves to be kept distinct as by a certain veil:
that is, when the hidden things and Mysteries of
Religion, Politics, and Philosophy are clothed in
Fables and Parables. Whether indeed some mystical
sense underlies the ancient fables of Poets is
somewhat doubtful: And we ourselves certainly admit
that we incline to the opinion that a Mystery was
infused into not a few Fables of the Ancient Poets.
Nor are we moved by the fact that these things are
generally left to boys and grammarians, and are held
in low esteem, so that we should form a contemptuous
opinion of them: But on the contrary, since it is
plainly established that those writings which recount
these fables are among the most ancient writings of
men, after the sacred scriptures, and the fables
themselves are far more ancient than these (for they
are reported as previously believed and received, not
as invented by those writers), they seem to be like a
certain subtle breeze which, from the traditions of
more Ancient Nations, into the channels

--- Page 170 ---
✠ 148 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
have fallen into the channels. But since what has hitherto been attempted concerning the interpretation of these Parables, namely by unskilled men, nor beyond learned commonplaces, in no way satisfies us; it seemed good to include Philosophy according to ancient Parables among the Desiderata. Of this work, however, we will subjoin one or two Examples. Not that the matter is perhaps of such great importance, but that we may maintain our purpose. This is as follows: that concerning those works which we place among the Desiderata (if anything is a little obscure), we perpetually propose either precepts for guiding that work, or Examples: lest anyone perhaps think that only some slight Notion concerning them has touched our mind, and that we, like Augurs, only measure regions with our mind, and do not know the ways of entering them. We do not find any other part in Poetry to be desired; but rather, since Poetry is a plant which, as it were, from a luxuriant earth, has germinated without a specific seed, it has grown above other doctrines and has spread widely. But now we will propose examples, only three in number: one from Natural Philosophy, one from Politics, and finally one from Morals.

                                                                Exam-

--- Page 171 ---
BOOK II. 149

First Example of Philosophy according to Ancient Parables,
in Natural Philosophy. Concerning the Universe, according
to the Fable of Pan.

The ancients leave the generation of *Pan* in doubt.
For some say he was begotten by *Mercury*;
Others attribute to him a far different mode of generation.
For they say that all the Suitors had intercourse with *Penelope*,
from which promiscuous union *Pan* was born as a common son.
Nor should that third explanation of his generation be omitted:
For some have reported that he was the son of *Jupiter* and *Hybris*
(that is, *Contumely*). However he was born, the *Fates* are said
to have been his sisters: who dwelt in a subterranean cave:
but *Pan* dwelled under the open sky. The effigy of *Pan* is
described by antiquity as such: Horned, with horns rising to a point,
and tapering up to the sky; his whole body shaggy and hairy;
his beard especially long; his form twofold, human as to the upper
parts, but half-beast and ending in goat's feet. He bore, moreover,
insignia of power; in his left hand a pipe made of seven reeds,
in his right a shepherd's crook or staff, curved and bent at the top.
He was clothed in a cloak of *Leopard* skin. Powers and functions
of this kind are attributed to him: that he is the God of hunters,
also of shepherds, and in general of country-dwellers; likewise
the President of mountains. He was also, next to *Mercury*,
H Now-

--- Page 172 ---
150          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
Messenger of the Gods. He was also considered the Leader and
Commander of the Nymphs, who around him per-
petually used to lead dances and dance:
Satyrs also accompanied him, and older than these,
the Sileni. Moreover, he had the power of in-
stalling terrors, especially empty and super-
stitious ones, which were also called Panics. His deeds,
however, are not many recounted: The
principal one is that he challenged Cupid
to a wrestling match, by whom he was also defeated
in the contest. He also entangled the Giant Typhon in nets
and restrained him. And they relate moreover,
that when Ceres, sad and indignant because of the abducted Proser-
pina, had hidden herself; and all the Gods
had greatly exerted themselves to find her, and
had dispersed themselves by various ways;
it happened to Pan alone, by a certain good
fortune, that while hunting he found her, and
pointed her out. He also dared to contend with Apollo
for victory in Music, and was even
preferred by Midas as judge; because of which judgment
Midas received ass's ears, but secretly and pri-
vately. Pan's loves are not recounted, or
at least are very rare; which might seem strange, among
a crowd of Gods so utterly and profusely amorous.
This alone is attributed to him, that
he loved Echo, who was also considered his wife;
and besides, one Nymph,
named Syrinx; towards whom, because of
the anger and vengeance of Cupid (whom he had not
feared to challenge to a wrestling match) inflamed

--- Page 173 ---
L I B E R II. 151
he was enamored. He is also said to have once enticed _Luna_ into deep forests. Nor did he beget any offspring; (which is similarly strange, since the Gods, especially the male ones, were exceedingly prolific) unless a certain handmaiden, a little woman, named _Iambe_, is attributed to him as a daughter; who used to delight guests with amusing little tales, and she was considered by some to be his offspring from his wife _Echo_. The _Parable_ seems to be as follows.

  _Pan_ (as his very name also sounds) represents and sets forth the _Universe_ or the _Totality of Things_. Concerning his Origin, there are entirely two opinions, and indeed there can be. For either he is from _Mercury_, that is, from the divine word (which the _Sacred Scriptures_ also place beyond controversy; the _Philosophers_ themselves, who were considered more divine, saw this) or

--- Page 174 ---
152          Of the Augmentation of Sciences.
or they asserted a principle, (*Water Thales*, *Air*
*Anaximenes*, *Fire Heraclitus*) yet they posited that
very principle as unique in actuality, but various
and dispensable in potential, as that in which
the seeds of all things lay hidden. Those indeed who
introduced matter entirely stripped and formless,
and indifferent to forms (as *Plato* and *Aristotle*),
approached much even closer and more readily
to the figure of the parable. For they posited
*Matter* as a public *Harlot*, and *Forms* as
*Suitors*: So that all opinions concerning the principles
of things return hither, and are reduced to that
distribution, that the world is, either from *Mer-*
*cury*, or from *Penelope* and *all the Suitors*.

The third *Generation of Pan*, however, is of such a kind
that the Greeks seem to have heard something of the Hebrew
mysteries, either through Egyptian intermediaries, or how-
soever. For it pertains to the state of the world,
not in its mere origins, but after the fall of Adam,
made exposed and subject to death and corruption.
For that state was, and remains, the offspring
of God and of sin (or of contumely). For the sin of Adam
was of the kind of *Contumely*, when *he wished to become*
*like God*. Therefore this threefold narration concerning the *Ge-*
*neration of Pan* can also seem true, if it is rightly
distinguished by things and times. For
this *Pan* (such as we now behold and
embrace him) was generated from the *Divine Word*, through the medium of
confused *Matter* (which was itself, however, the work
                                                                of God)

--- Page 175 ---
LIBER II. 153
(was) and by the supervening *Transgression*, and through
it, corruption, has its Origin.
The *Fates*, truly called the *sisters of things*, are said to belong to the Nature of things, and are posited. For the *Fates* are called
the origins of things, and their durations, and their ends,
and also their depressions, and eminences,
and labors, and felicities, finally, whatsoever conditions
of the Individual: which, however, unless in
a noble Individual (such as a man, or a city,
or a nation) are scarcely recognized. But to
these so various conditions, *Pan*, that is, the Nature of Things, leads those individual things;
so that, as it were, the same thing (insofar as it pertains to Individuals) is
the chain of Nature and the thread of the Fates. To
these things, moreover, the Ancients feigned that *Pan* always
dwells under the open sky, but the *Fates* inhabit a huge
subterranean cave, and from there with greatest swiftness suddenly fly to men:
because *Nature*, and the face of the Universe, is
visible and open; but the *Fates* of Individuals are
hidden, and swift. But if *Fate* is taken
more broadly, so as to denote every event whatsoever, not only the more
illustrious ones, yet certainly even
in that sense it agrees very well with the Universality
of Things; since from the order of Nature, nothing is so
insignificant that it happens without cause; and again nothing
is so great that it does not depend on something else; so
that the very fabric of Nature, in its bosom and lap,
embraces every event both smallest and greatest;
and in its own time brings it forth by a certain Law.
Therefore, it is no wonder if the *Fates*, as *Pan's*
H 3 sisters

--- Page 176 ---
154 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
Therefore it is no wonder if the Fates are sisters of Pan, and if errors were introduced, they were certainly justifiable. For Fortune is the daughter of the Common People, and has pleased only the more superficial Philosophers. Indeed, *Epicurus* seems not only to utter profane discourse, but also to be foolish, when he said, *It is better to believe the fable of the Gods than to assert Fate*, as if anything in the universe could exist like an Island, separated from the chain of things. But *Epicurus*, adapting and subjecting his natural philosophy (as is clear from his own words) to his moral philosophy, wished to admit no opinion that would oppress and vex the mind, and would disturb or trouble that *Euthymia* (which he had received from *Democritus*). Therefore, indulging in the pleasantness of thoughts, rather than enduring the truth, he plainly cast off the yoke, and repudiated both the necessity of Fate and the fear of the Gods. But enough has been said about the kinship of the *Fates* with *Pan*.

Moreover, horns are attributed to the world, broader at the base, sharp at the top. For all nature of things is pointed like a Pyramid. Indeed, Individuals, in which the base of nature extends, are infinite; these are gathered into species, and these themselves are manifold; species in turn rise into genera, and these also, ascending, are contracted into more general categories; so that finally nature seems to converge into one; which is signified by *that pyramidal Figure of Pan's Horns*. It is indeed no wonder that *Pan's* horns also strike the heavens;

--- Page 177 ---
LIBER II. 155
strike; since the lofty things of nature, or universal ideas, somehow reach to divine things. And so that celebrated chain of *Homer* (namely, of Natural causes) was remembered as fixed at the foot of Jove's throne; nor has anyone (as is evident) treated Metaphysics, and those things in Nature which are eternal and immutable, and for a little while withdrawn his mind from the flux of things, who did not at the same time fall into Natural Theology; so ready and near is the transition from the summit of that Pyramid to Divine things.

But the *Body of Nature* is most elegantly and most truly depicted as *shaggy*, on account of the rays of things. For rays are like the hairs or shaggy fibers of nature; and almost all things are more or less radiant: which is most manifest in the faculty of sight; nor less in every magnetic virtue, and operation at a distance. For whatever operates at a distance, can also rightly be said to emit rays. But most prominent of all is *Pan's Beard*, because the rays of celestial bodies, and especially of the Sun, operate and penetrate most powerfully from afar. So much so that the upper parts of the earth, and even the inner parts, have plainly changed and subdued, and filled with spirit, to some distance. But a more elegant figure is that of *Pan's Beard*, because the Sun itself, when its upper part is enveloped in a cloud, and rays burst forth below, is seen to be *bearded* in appearance.

Also the body of nature is most rightly described
H 4

--- Page 178 ---
156      On the Advancement of Learning.
is described as biform, because of the difference of the superior
and inferior bodies. For the former, because of their beauty,
and the equality and constancy of their motions,
as well as their dominion over the earth and
terrestrial things, are rightly represented under a human figure;
since human Nature is a partaker of order and
dominion: But the latter, because of their perturbation,
and uncomposed motions, and
because they are governed in many things by the celestial bodies,
can be content with the figure of a brute animal. Fur-
thermore, the same description of a biform body pertains
to the participation of species: For no
species of nature can appear simple,
but as participating from two, and compounded.
For man has something of the brute,
the brute something of the plant, the plant something
of the inanimate body, and all things are truly bi-
form, and compacted from a superior and inferior species.
But the allegory of the *Goat's Feet* is most acute,
because of the ascension of terrestrial bodies
towards the regions of air and heaven,
where they also become suspended, and are cast down from there,
rather than descending. For the goat is a climbing animal,
and it loves to hang from rocks, and
to cling to precipices; Similarly also
things, though destined for the lower globe, do so,
and that in wondrous ways, as is most manifest in clouds and meteors.
Indeed, not without reason
*Gilbert*, who wrote most laboriously about the Magnet, and
according to the experimental method,
raised a doubt; Whether perhaps bodies
heavy-

--- Page 179 ---
BOOK II. 157

heavy bodies, after a long distance from the earth,
gradually lose their motion towards lower regions.
The *insignia* however placed in the hands of *Pan* are
twofold; one of *Harmony*, the other of *Empire*.
For the *pipe* of *seven reeds* clearly shows
the concord of things and harmony, or a concord
mixed with discord (which is produced from the
motion of the seven wandering stars). Nor indeed
are other errors, or manifest wanderings, found in
the heavens besides those of the seven Planets,
which, composed and tempered with the equality
of the fixed stars and their perpetual and invariable
distance from one another, can both preserve the
constancy of species and excite the flux of individuals.
If indeed there are any minor Planets which are not
seen; if also any major change in the heavens (as in
some superlunar Comets) they appear indeed like
pipes, either entirely mute, or only noisy for a time;
inasmuch as their operations either do not reach us,
or do not long disturb that harmony of Pan's seven
pipes. That *shepherd's crook* of *Empire*, however,
is a noble metaphor, because of Nature's ways,
partly straight, partly oblique. And that *staff*, or
*rod*, is especially curved towards the upper part,
because all the works of divine providence in the world
are done almost by windings and circuits, so that one
thing may seem to be done, while another is truly
done, just as H 5 Joseph's

--- Page 180 ---
158      On the Advancement of Learning.
*The sale of Joseph into Egypt, and similar things.*
Moreover, in every more prudent human government,
those who sit at the helm for the people's
benefit, introduce and insinuate what they want
more successfully through pretexts and indirect ways
than directly. Also (which perhaps
might seem strange) in purely
natural things, you would sooner deceive Nature than
force it: so much so, that what is done directly is inept,
and impedes itself; whereas, on the contrary, an indirect
and insinuating way flows gently, and achieves its
effect. *Pan's Garment* and cloak are
very ingeniously feigned to have been made from a *Leopard's Skin*,
because of the spots scattered everywhere. For the
heaven is sprinkled with stars, the seas with islands, the earth with flowers;
And also particular things are usually variegated around their surface,
which is, as it were, the *Cloak of the Thing*.
   The office of *Pan*, however, could not be so
vividly presented and explained by any other thing,
than that he is the *God of Hunters*. For every
natural action, and indeed movement and
progression, is nothing other than *Hunting*.
For both sciences and arts hunt their works;
and human counsels their ends; and all natural
things hunt either their nourishment, that they may be
preserved, or their pleasures and delights, that they may
be perfected; (for every hunting, indeed,
is either for prey, or for for pleasure:) and that
in skillful and sagacious ways.

                                                                  Torva

--- Page 181 ---
LIBER II. 159
*The fierce Lioness follows the wolf, the wolf itself*
*the she-goat,*
*The playful she-goat follows the flowering cytisus.*
Pan is also the God of country-dwellers in general, because such people live more according to nature, whereas in cities and courts, nature is corrupted by excessive refinement, as that amorous saying of the poet, true, on account of such delights, is also about Nature:
—— *The girl herself is the least part of herself.*
But Pan is especially called the *President* of *Mountains*, because in mountains and elevated places the nature of things is revealed, and is more subjected to the eyes and contemplation. That Pan is another *messenger of the Gods, like Mercury*, is a plainly divine allegory, since, immediately after the Word of God, the very image of the world is a proclamation of divine power and wisdom. Which the divine Poet also sang: *The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows His handiwork.*
But *Nymphs* delight *Pan*, that is, souls: for the delights of the world are the souls of living things. But he is rightly their Emperor, since each of them follows its own Nature as a leader, and around him, with infinite variety, as if each in its native manner, they dance and lead choruses, with motion never ceasing. Therefore, some of the more recent thinkers acutely reduced all faculties of the soul to motion, and the disdain and precipita-
H 6

--- Page 182 ---
**160 On the Advancement of Learning.**
haste, he noted, who, fixing their eyes too hastily on memory, imagination, and reason, and contemplating them, overlooked the cogitative faculty, which holds the primary place. For he who remembers, or even recollects, thinks; and he who imagines, similarly thinks; and he who reasons, certainly thinks: Finally, the soul, whether prompted by sense, or left to itself, whether in the functions of the intellect, or of the affections and will, dances to the rhythm of thoughts; which is that dancing of the Nymphs. But perpetually accompany them *Satyrs* and *Sileni*, namely old age and youth. For of all things there is a certain age that is cheerful and delights in motion, and again an age that is slow and bibulous: But the pursuits of both ages, to one truly contemplating, perhaps seem ridiculous and deformed, like some *Satyr* or *Silenus*. But concerning *Panic Terrors*, a most prudent Doctrine is proposed. For the nature of things has implanted in all living beings fear and dread, a preserver of their life and essence, and one that avoids and repels impending evils. Nevertheless, this same Nature is ignorant of how to keep moderation, but always mixes vain and empty fears with salutary ones; so much so that all things (if they were allowed to be seen inwardly) are most full of *Panic Terrors*; especially human things; and most of all among the common people, who, by superstition (which is truly nothing other than *Panic terror*), is immensely troubled and agi-
                                        tated,

--- Page 183 ---
LIBER II. 161
is troubled and agitated, especially in hard, anxious, and adverse times. Nor does this superstition reign only among the common people, but from the opinions of the common people it sometimes leaps even into the wiser sort, as *Epicurus* divinely spoke (if the other things he discoursed concerning the Gods had been according to this standard): *It is not profane to deny the gods of the common people, but it is profane to apply the opinions of the common people to the Gods.*

But as for the *Audacity of Pan*, and the *Fight by challenge with Cupid*; this points to the fact that matter is not without an inclination and appetite for the dissolution of the world, and a relapse into that ancient Chaos, unless the very strong harmony of things (signified by *Love or Cupid*) were to restrain its malice and impetus, and compel it into order. And so it happens by a very good fate for men and things (or rather by immense divine goodness) that *Pan* experiences that adverse contest, and departs vanquished. To the very same point belongs also that about *Typhon* entangled in *nets*, because however vast and unusual the swellings of things may sometimes be (which is what *Typhon* signifies), whether the seas swell, or the clouds swell, or the earth swells, or other things, nevertheless the nature of things entangles and restrains such exuberances and unruliness of bodies in an inextricable net, and binds them as if with an adamantine chain.

But as for the fact that the *Discovery of Ceres* is attributed to this God, and that during a hunt; the re-

--- Page 184 ---
162          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
but what is denied to the Gods, even to those diligently seeking and doing that very thing; it holds a very true and prudent warning: namely this, that the invention of useful things for life and culture should not be expected from abstract Philosophers, as if from greater Gods, even if they apply themselves to that very thing with all their might; but only from *Pan*, that is, from sagacious experience, and a universal knowledge of worldly things; which also by a certain chance, and as it were while hunting, is accustomed to stumble upon such inventions. For all the most useful inventions are owed to experience, and were, as it were, certain gifts scattered among men by chance.
    But that contest of *Music*, and its outcome, exhibits a salutary doctrine, and one which can impose bonds of sobriety upon human reason and judgment, when it is striving and exalting itself. For there seems to be a twofold Harmony, and as it were *Music*, one of divine Wisdom, the other of human Reason. For to human judgment, and as it were to the ears of mortals, the administration of the world and of things, and the more secret divine Judgments, sound somewhat harsh, and as it were dissonant: Which ignorance, although it is deservedly marked by *ass's Ears*, nevertheless, those very ears are worn secretly, not openly. For the deformity of this thing is neither seen nor noted by the common people.
    Finally, it is by no means surprising if no *Loves* are attributed to Pan, except for the *Marriage of Echo*;

--- Page 185 ---
L I B E R II. 163
*Echo*; For the world enjoys itself, and all things within itself: But he who loves, wishes to enjoy, and in abundance there is no place for desire. Therefore, there can be no *Loves* of the World, nor a desire for possession (since it is content with itself), unless perhaps the *Loves of Discourse*. These are the *Nymph Echo*, a thing not solid, but vocal, or if they are more accurate, *Syringa*, when indeed words and voices are governed by certain numbers, whether Poetic or Oratorical, and as it were by modulation.

But among discourses or voices, only *Echo* is excellently taken for the marriage of the world: For that indeed is true Philosophy, which most faithfully renders the very voices of the world, and is written as if dictated by the world itself; and is nothing else than its image and reflection; nor does it add anything of its own, but only repeats and resonates.

For the fact that *Pan* had once enticed *Luna* into the deep woods, seems to pertain to the meeting of sense with celestial, or divine, things. For the case of *Endymion* is different, and that of *Pan* is different: *Luna* spontaneously descends to sleeping *Endymion*; since divine things sometimes spontaneously flow into an intellect that is asleep and withdrawn from the senses: But if they are summoned and called by sense, as if by *Pan*, then indeed they offer no other light than that,
   *Such as is a journey in the woods under an uncertain moon, under a dim light.*
                                                                Ad

--- Page 186 ---
164      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
It also pertains to the world's sufficiency and perfection,
that *it does not bring forth offspring*. For it
generates by parts; how could it generate as a whole,
since there is no body outside itself? For concerning
that *little woman Iambe*, the supposed Daughter
of *Pan*, that is certainly a most wise addition
to the fable. For by her are represented those
garrulous doctrines about the nature of things,
which wander everywhere throughout all times, and fill
everything, in reality unfruitful, as if spurious
in kind, but in their garrulity sometimes pleasant,
sometimes troublesome and importunate.

*Another Example of Philosophy, according to Ancient*
  *parables in Politics. On War according to the fable*
  *of Perseus.*

**P**erseus, since he was an *Oriental*, is said to have been
sent by *Pallas*, to cut off the head of *Medusa*,
who was a great calamity to very many peoples in the *West*,
in the furthest parts of *Iberia*. For this monster,
otherwise cruel and immense, was also so dire
and horrendous in appearance, that by that alone it would turn men into
stones. Now *Medusa* was one of the *Gorgons*,
and the only mortal among them, since the others
were not subject to suffering. Perseus therefore, preparing
himself for such a noble deed, received arms and gifts
from three Gods by way of loan; *Wings* from *Mercury*,
winged sandals, namely, not armpit wings; but a *Helmet*
from *Pluto*; and finally a *Shield* from *Pallas, and*

--- Page 187 ---
L I B E R II. 165
and a *Mirror*. Yet, however (though so great
equipped with apparatus) he did not go straight to *Medusa*,
but first turned aside to the *Graeae*. These sisters,
from another parent, were to the *Gorgons*;
And these *Graeae* were grey-haired even from birth
and like old women. But to them
there was only one eye and one tooth for all;
which, as each happened to go out,
they carried in turn, but on returning they used to lay them down.
Therefore, this eye, and this
tooth they lent to *Perseus*. Then at last,
when he judged himself sufficiently equipped to accomplish his destined tasks,
he hastened to *Medusa*,
unwearied and flying. But he found her
sleeping, yet he dared not commit himself to her gaze
(if perchance she should awaken);
but with neck averted, and looking into that *Mirror*
of *Pallas*, and in this way directing his blows,
he cut off *Medusa's* head: And from her blood,
poured upon the ground, immediately winged *Pegasus*
sprang forth. But the severed head
*Perseus* inserted into the *Shield of Pallas*. to which even
then its power remained, so that at its sight all
became stiff as if thunderstruck or petrified.
   The fable seems to have been devised concerning the *method of waging war*
*and prudence*. And first, every
undertaking of war ought to be as a *Mission from*
*Pallas*; certainly not from *Venus* (as the *Trojan* war
was) or from any other trivial cause; since indeed
it is proper that *Decrees* concerning wars be founded in solid *Councils*.
Then concerning the *Kind of war* to be chosen,
                                       chosen,

--- Page 188 ---
166          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
choosing, the fable proposes three precepts, exceedingly sound and weighty. The first is, that one should not greatly strive for the subjugation of neighboring nations. For the method of enlarging patrimony and empire is not the same. For in private possessions, the proximity of estates is regarded, but in extending empire, Opportunity, and the ease of waging war, and profit, ought to be in place of proximity. Therefore *Perseus*, although an *Easterner*, nevertheless by no means declined such a distant expedition, even to the farthest *West*. A notable example of this matter is in the different method of waging war of the father and son Kings, *Philip* and *Alexander*. For he, occupied in neighboring wars, added few cities to his Empire, and that not without the greatest struggle and danger. Indeed he who both at other times, and especially in the *Battle of Chaeronea*, was brought into ultimate danger: But *Alexander*, having well dared a distant expedition against the *Persians*, subjugated countless nations, more tired by journeys than by battles. This very thing is seen still more clearly in the extension of the *Roman Empire*. who, for a time, from the part of the *West*, had scarcely penetrated beyond *Ligurian* territory with arms, at the same time encompassed the provinces of the *East* as far as *Mount Taurus* with arms and Empire. Also *Charles VIII, King of France*, having not found the *British War* (which was finally settled by marriage) very easy, an expedi-
                                                              tion

--- Page 189 ---
L I B E R II. 167
that distant *Neapolitan* expedition,
he accomplished with admirable ease and success.
Distant wars certainly have this advantage,
that one contends with those who are least accustomed to military service and
the arms of an invader. This is otherwise the case with
neighbors. Also, the preparation
in expeditions of this kind is usually more diligent
and better equipped; and the terror among the enemies
from the very daring and confidence is greater. Nor can it
easily happen in those distant expeditions,
that the enemies, to whom one arrives by such a long journey,
can make any diversion or reciprocal invasion,
which is more often employed in the method of warfare with
neighbors. The main point, however, is,
that in subjugating neighbors, the choice of opportunities
is limited; but if one does not shrink from more distant undertakings,
one can, at one's discretion, transfer the war
to where either military discipline is most enervated, or the nation's
strength is greatly worn out and consumed, or
civil dissensions have opportunely arisen, or other advantages of this
kind present themselves. Secondly,
it is important that there is always a just,
pious, honorable, and favorable *Cause for War*: For this
adds alacrity, both to the soldiers and to the people
contributing expenses, and opens and conciliates alliances,
and finally has very many advantages.
Among the causes of war, however, that is very
favorable which leads to the overthrowing of tyrannies,
under which the people succumb and are prostrated without spirit and vigor,

--- Page 190 ---
168      Oɴ Tʜᴇ Aᴜɢᴍ. Oғ Sᴄɪᴇɴᴄᴇs.
vigor, as if under the *Gaze of Medusa*; which
also gained divinity for *Hercules*. For the Ro-
mans, it was certainly a great principle to hasten strenuously &
diligently to defend allies, if in any way they had been
oppressed. Also, wars for a just vengeance were
almost always successful, such as the war against
*Brutus* & *Cassius*, to avenge the death of *Caesar*;
(the war) of *Severus* to avenge the death of *Pertinax*;
(the war) of *Junius Brutus* to avenge the death of *Lucretia*.
Finally, whoever by war either relieves or avenges the calamities
and injuries of men, fights under *Perseus*. Third, that in every
war undertaken there be a true *Estimation of forces*;
and that it be rightly weighed whether the war is
such that it can be finished and brought to an end,
lest anyone pursue vast and infinite hopes.
For Perseus prudently chose among the *Gorgons*
(by whom wars are represented) her,

--- Page 191 ---
LIBER II. 169
for accomplishing [these tasks]. (Since Speed can do very much in war), the means of speed were *Talares* (winged sandals), not *Axillares* (winged shoulder-pads), and were attached to the feet, not the shoulders; because speed is required not so much in the initial attacks of war, as in those things which follow and are a support to the first. For no error in war has been more frequent than that pursuits and auxiliary attacks do not correspond to the alacrity of the beginnings. But *Pluto's Helmet* (which used to make men invisible) is a clear parable. For the *concealment of counsels*, after speed, is of the greatest importance for war. Of which (i.e., concealment) Speed itself is also a great part. For speed prevents the divulging of counsels. To *Pluto's Helmet* it pertains that one person presides over the war with free mandates; for consultations with many have something more of *Mars' Crests* than of *Pluto's Helmet*. To the same belong various pretexts, and ambiguous designs, and emissary rumors, which either dazzle or avert the eyes of men, and place the true counsels in obscurity. Also diligent and suspicious precautions concerning letters, envoys, deserters, and many other things, adorn and reinforce *Pluto's Helmet*. But it is no less important to explore the *counsels of the enemy* than to conceal one's own. Therefore to *Pluto's Helmet* must be joined *Pallas' Mirror*, through which the enemy's strengths, weaknesses, secret supporters, dissensions and factions, progress, and counsels are discerned.

--- Page 192 ---
170 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
(are discerned). But since the conduct of war involves so many unforeseen events, that neither in concealing one's own plans, nor in exploring those of the enemy, nor in celerity itself, much trust should be placed, therefore before all things *Pallas's Shield*, namely *Providence*, must be taken up, so that as little as possible may be left to *Fortune*. To this belong, to enter explored paths, to diligently fortify camps (which in modern warfare has almost fallen into disuse; but camps, like a fortified city, were for the Romans against the outcomes of battle), a stable and ordered battle line, not trusting too much in light-armed cohorts, or even in troops of cavalry; finally all things which pertain to a solid and careful *Defensive*: since *Pallas's Shield* is certainly worth more in Wars than *Mars's Sword* itself. But for *Perseus*, however well equipped with forces or courage, something else remains, of the greatest importance in all respects, before war is begun: Namely, that he *turn aside to the Graeae*. But the *Graeae* are *betrayals*, namely sisters of wars, not true sisters, indeed, but as if unequal in nobility of birth. For wars are noble, betrayals degenerate and base. Their description is elegant, that they are *hoary* from birth, and as if *old women*, because of the perpetual cares and trepidations of traitors. But their power (before they break out into open defection) is either in the *Eye* or in the *Tooth*. For every faction, alienated from any state,
and

--- Page 193 ---
L I B E R II. 171

...[aliena]ted, and inclined to treason, and *spies*, and *bites*. And such an *Eye* and *Tooth* is, as it were, common; for whatever they have learned and known, it almost passes and runs through hands from one to another. And as far as the *Tooth* is concerned, they bite with, as it were, one mouth, and spread the same slanders; so that if you hear one, you hear them all. Therefore, these *Graeae* must be conciliated by *Perseus*, and brought into assistance, especially so that they may lend him their *Eye* and *Tooth*; the *Eye* for intelligence; the *Tooth* for spreading rumors, and stirring up envy, and agitating the minds of men. But after all things have been well prepared and disposed for war, that must first of all be taken care of, which *Perseus* did, that *Medusa* be found *sleeping*. For a prudent undertaker of war almost always finds the enemy unprepared, and closer to security. Finally, in the very actions and assaults of war, that *Gaze into the mirror of Pallas* must be employed. For many, before the dangers themselves, can keenly and attentively examine the enemy's affairs; but at the very moment of *Danger*, either they are overwhelmed by terror, or they view dangers too rashly and from the front: whence they rush into them rashly, mindful of conquering, forgetful of avoiding. But neither of these ought to happen, but into the *mirror of Pallas*, with neck bent back, one must look, so that the attack may be rightly directed, without either terror or fury.
                                                              A bel-

--- Page 194 ---
172      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
   From a completed war and victory, two effects follow. First, that generation and emergence of Pegasus, which quite clearly denotes Fame, which flies everywhere, celebrates victory, and makes the remnants of war easy and compliant with one's wishes. Second, the carrying of Medusa's Head on the Shield; indeed, no kind of protection can be compared to this in terms of its excellence. For a single, signal and memorable deed, successfully carried out and accomplished, makes all movements of enemies stiffen, and renders malevolence itself stupid.

*Third Example of Philosophy according to Ancient Parables, in Morals. On Cupidity, according to the fable of Dionysus.*

**T**hey relate that Semele, Jupiter's mistress, after she had bound him by an inviolable oath to an indefinite wish, asked that he should approach her embraces in the same form as he was accustomed to with Juno. And so she perished in the conflagration. The infant, however, whom she was carrying in her womb, was taken by the Father and sewn into his thigh, until he should complete the months destined for the fetus. From this burden, however, Jupiter meanwhile limped somewhat. And so the Boy, because he burdened and pricked Jupiter while he was carried in his thigh, received the name Dionysus. After he was born, he was nourished by Proserpina for several years. When he was grown, with a face almost womanly
                                                                    cōn-

--- Page 195 ---
L I B E R I I. 173
he was seen, so that his sex seemed as if ambiguous. He was also once dead and buried for a time, and not long after, he revived. And in his early youth, he first discovered and taught the cultivation of the vine, and indeed the making and use of wine. From this, having become famous and renowned, he subjugated the world and proceeded to the furthest boundaries of the Indians. He was carried in a chariot drawn by Tigers; around him leaped deformed *Dæmones*, called *Cobali*, *Acratus*, and others. Moreover, even the *Muses* joined his retinue. But he took *Ariadne* as his wife, abandoned and forsaken by *Theseus*. The *Ivy* was sacred to him. He was also considered the inventor and institutor of sacred rites and ceremonies; of that kind, however, which were both fanatical, and full of corruptions, and moreover cruel. He also had the power to inflict madness. Certainly, in his *Orgies*, two distinguished men are said to have been torn apart by women driven mad: *Pentheus* and *Orpheus*: The former, while he had wished to be a curious spectator of what was being done, having climbed a tree; the latter, while he was playing the lyre sweetly and skillfully. And the deeds of this God are almost confused with the deeds of *Jupiter*.

The fable seems to pertain to *morals*, so that hardly anything better can be found in Moral Philosophy. But under the *Person of Bacchus* is described the *Nature of Cupidity*, or of the *affections* and *perturbations* of the mind. First therefore, as far as the *Birth of Cupidity* is concerned; the origin of all Cupidity, however harmful, is none other than
               I                   *Good*

--- Page 196 ---
174          OF THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
Apparent Good. For just as the mother of virtue is
existing good, similarly the mother of cupidity is
apparent good. The one is the legitimate wife of *Jove* (under whose per-
son the human soul is represented), the other a concubine: who nevertheless
emulates the honors of *Juno*, like *Semele*. But *Cupidity* is conceived
in an *illicit wish*, granted rashly, before it is rightly understood
and judged. And after it has begun to effervesce, *its Mother* (namely the
nature and species of good) *is destroyed and perishes by excessive fire*.
But the process of cupidity from its conception is this: It is both
nourished and hidden by the human mind (which is its parent), especially
in *its lower part, as if in the thigh*; and it stings the mind, and
convulses it, and depresses it, so much so that actions and decisions are
hindered by it, and limp. Moreover, after it has been confirmed by consent
and time, and breaks forth into actions, so that it has now, as it were,
*completed its months*, and is plainly brought forth and born, yet at first
for some time it is educated among *Proserpina*, that is, *it seeks hiding
places*; and it is clandestine, and as it were subterranean; until, the
*reins of shame and fear* being removed, and boldness having grown, it
either assumes the pretext of some virtue, or despises infamy itself.
And that is most true, that every more vehement affection is, as it were,
of *ambiguous sex*. For it has *manly impulse, but womanly impotence*.
Also that is excellent, that *Bacchus, though dead, revives*: For affections
sometimes seem lulled, and extinct, but no faith is to be placed in them,
not even when buried:
                                                                  siqui-

--- Page 197 ---
BOOK II. 175
since, when material and opportunity are provided, they re-
vive.
   The parable *Of the Invention of the Vine* is a wise one: For
every affection is exceedingly ingenious and
sagacious in investigating those things which nourish and
foster it. And yet, before all things that have become known to
men, *Wine* is most powerful and most effective for exciting
and inflaming perturbations of every
kind, and is, for Desires in general, like a common fuel.
But most elegantly is *Affection or Desire* described as *a subju-*
*gator of provinces, and an undertaker of infinite expedi-*
*tion*: For it never rests content with what has been gained,
but with an infinite and insatiable
appetite, it tends towards further things, and always longs for new things.
Even *Tigers* stable with *Affections*, and are yoked to their *Cha-*
*riot* from time to time. For after *Affection* has begun to be
*Curule*, not pedestrian, but a victor over reason, and made,
as it were, a *Triumphator*, it is cruel, and untamed, and
merciless towards all who oppose or set themselves against it. It is witty,
however, that those deformed and ridiculous *Demons* leap
about the *Chariot of Bacchus*. For every more vehement
affection produces movements in the Eyes, and the Mouth itself,
and the

--- Page 198 ---
176 **On the Advancement of Learning**
learning. For in this matter, the indulgence and wantonness of intellects greatly diminishes the Majesty of the Muses, so that, while they ought to be leaders of life and standard-bearers, they are not infrequently handmaidens and entertainers of Desires.

But especially noble is that Allegory, *that Bacchus poured out his loves upon her who had been abandoned and disdained by another.* For it is most certain, *that affections seek and pursue that which Experience has long since repudiated.* And let all be aware, who, serving and indulging their affections, greatly increase the price of obtaining (it) (whether they seek honors, or loves, or glory, or knowledge, or whatever else), *that they seek things abandoned, and dismissed and repudiated by many, through almost all ages, after trial.* Nor is it without Mystery, that *Ivy was sacred to Bacchus.* For this is fitting in a twofold manner. First, because *Ivy flourishes in winter;* then, because it *creeps around so many things (trees, walls, buildings),* and spreads itself around, and raises itself up. For as to the first point, *every Desire, through Resistance and Prohibition,* and as it were *Antiperistasis (just as Ivy through the cold of Winter) flourishes,* and acquires vigor: Secondly, *a predominant affection in the human soul encircles all its actions and decrees, like Ivy;* nor will you find almost anything pure, where it does not impress its tendrils. Nor is it surprising, if *Superstitious Rites are attributed to Bacchus,* since almost every *unhealthy affection in depraved Religions*
                                                                    I

--- Page 199 ---
LIBER III. 177
...should run riot: to such an extent that the filth of Heretics has surpassed the Bacchanalia of the Heathens; whose superstitions also were no less bloody than they were foul. Nor is it likewise strange if Frenzies are thought to be sent by Bacchus, since every Affection in its excess is like a brief Madness, and, if it besieges and presses more vehemently, they often end in Insanity. But that story about Pentheus and Orpheus, torn apart amidst the Orgies of Bacchus, has an evident Parable; since every powerful affection is most harsh and most intolerant towards two things: one of which is curious Inquiry into it, the other, salutary and free Admonition. Nor will it be of help if that inquiry is made only for the sake of contemplation or observation, as if having climbed a tree, without any malice of mind; nor again, if that admonition is applied with much gentleness and skill; but in any case, the Orgies tolerate neither Pentheus nor Orpheus. Lastly, that Confusion of the Persons of Jove and Bacchus can rightly be translated into a Parable; since noble and famous deeds, and distinguished and glorious merits, sometimes arise from Virtue and right reason and magnanimity, but sometimes from a latent affection and hidden Desire (although both things equally rejoice in the celebrity of fame and praise): so that it is not easy to distinguish the deeds of Dionysus from the deeds of Jove.

But we linger too long in the Theater; let us pass to the Palace of the Mind, whose threshold it is fitting to enter with greater veneration and care.
I 3 FRAN-

--- Page 200 ---
178    ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCES.

OF FRANCIS BACON
OF VERULAM,
Viscount St. Alban,
*On the Dignity & Advancement*
*of the Sciences,*
BOOK THREE.
*To his King.*
CHAPTER I.

*The Division of Knowledge into Theology & Philosophy.*
*The Division of Philosophy into three Doctrines; Concerning God,*
*concerning Nature, concerning Man. The Constitution of Primary*
*Philosophy, as the common Mother of all.*

[Decorative initial H] All History (O excellent King) walks on the ground, and performs the office of a guide rather than a light: *Poetry* however is like a dream to doctrine: A sweet, and varied thing, and wishing to seem to have something Divine in itself; which dreams also claim. But now it is time for me to awaken, and lift myself from the ground, cutting through the clear ether of *Philosophy & the Sciences*.

*Knowledge* is like waters. Some waters descend from heaven, others emanate from the earth. Also, the primary division of *Sciences* must be taken from their sources. Of these, some are situated on high, others here below. For all *Knowledge* receives a twofold
                                        [The word "sortitur" continues on the next page]

--- Page 201 ---
L I B E R III. 179
obtains a twofold kind of information. One is divinely inspired,
the other arises from sense. For as to that Knowledge,
which is infused *by Teaching*; it is Cumulative, not Original:
just as it also happens with waters, which besides primary springs,
increase from other rivulets received into them. Therefore, we shall divide
Knowledge into *Theology* and *Philosophy*. Here we understand *Theology*
as *Inspired* or *Sacred*, *not Natural*; about which we shall speak
a little later. But that (Inspired, namely) we shall reserve for the
last place, so that we may conclude our discourses with it;
since it is the harbor, and Sabbath of all human contemplations.
    *Philosophy*, moreover, has a threefold Object: *God*,
*Nature*, *Man*: And likewise a threefold *Ray of Things*.
For *Nature* strikes the intellect with a *direct* Ray;
*God*, however, because of the unequal medium (namely, *Creatures*),
with a *refracted* Ray; *Man*, truly, shown and exhibited to himself,
with a *reflected* Ray. It is therefore fitting to divide *Philosophy*
into *three Doctrines*; the *Doctrine concerning God*, the *Doctrine concerning*
*Nature*, the *Doctrine concerning Man*. Since, however,
the Divisions of the Sciences are not like diverse lines
which meet at one angle; but rather like branches of trees,
which are joined in one trunk, (which trunk also for some
space is whole and continuous, before it divides itself
into branches;) therefore the matter demands that
before we pursue the members of the prior division,
one *Universal Science* be established, which may be the
Mother of the others, and be held in the progress
        L 4                Doctri-

--- Page 202 ---
...and is considered in the course of a doctrine concerning certain parts of Physics, such as Principles and the Soul, composed and collected, and with a certain sublimity of discourse, by men who love to admire themselves, as if placed at the Summit of Sciences. But we, having laid aside pomp, only wish that some Science be designated, which may be a Receptacle of Axioms, which are not proper to particular Sciences, but belong to several of them in common.

Let no one doubt that very many Axioms of this kind exist. For example, If to unequals you add equals, all things will be unequal: The rule is from Mathematics: The same also holds in Ethics, as far as Distributive Justice is concerned; Indeed, in Commutative Justice, the Principle of Equity demands that equals be given to unequals: but in Distributive [Justice], unless unequals are presented to unequals, the injustice would be greatest. Which in the same third

--- Page 203 ---
**BOOK III. 181**
...agree in the same third thing, also agree with each other: It is likewise a rule from Mathematics; but at the same time so powerful in Logic, that it is the Foundation of Syllogisms. Nature reveals itself most of all in the smallest things: It is a rule in Physics, so valid, that it even gave rise to Democritus's Atoms; Nevertheless, Aristotle rightly applied it in Politics, who begins the Contemplation of the Republic from the family. All things change, nothing perishes: It is likewise a rule in Physics; expressed in this way, 'As for Nature, it is neither diminished nor increased:' The same applies to Natural Theology, thus varied; These are the works of Omnipotence: To make something from nothing, and to reduce something to nothing: Which Scripture also testifies, "I have learned that all the works which God has made endure forever; we can add nothing to them, nor take anything from them." The destruction of a thing is prevented by its reduction to its principles: It is a rule in Physics; The same holds true in Politics, (as Machiavelli rightly noted) since those things which most prevent the destruction of Republics are almost nothing other than their reformation, and reduction to ancient customs. Creeping decay is more contagious than mature decay; It is a rule in Physics, the same is also notable in Morals; since the most depraved and most criminal men inflict less corruption upon public Morals, than those who seem to have some soundness and virtue, and are only partly evil. That which is more conservative of a greater form, is more powerful in activity: It is a rule in Physics. For, lest the very connection of things be cut off, nor
<div align="center">I 5</div> <div align="right">detur</div>

--- Page 204 ---
182      Dᴇ Aᴜɢᴍ. Sᴄɪᴇɴᴛ.
(as they say) a vacuum be given, it contributes to preserving the fabric of the Universe. But that heavy things gather to the mass of the earth, it contributes only to preserving the region of dense things. Therefore, the former motion dominates the latter. The same holds true in Politics. For what contributes to preserving the Polity itself in its nature, is stronger than what contributes to the well-being of particular members in the Republic. Similarly, the same applies in *Theology*. For in theological virtues, Charity, which is the most communicative virtue, stands out above all others. *The power of the agent is increased by the Antiperistasis of the Contrary:* This is a rule in *Physics*. The same performs wonders in *Politics*; since every faction, when the contrary assails it, is vehemently provoked. *A discordant tone ending in a sharp concord, commends the harmony:* This is a rule of *Music*. The same in *Ethics* and *Affections*

--- Page 205 ---
LIBER III. 183

examples. Furthermore, *Persian Magic* (which is so
celebrated) was especially concerned with noting the
architectures and structures, both natural and civil, that
served as symbols. Nor are all these things which we have
mentioned, and others of this kind, mere similarities (such
as they might perhaps appear to less discerning men), but
plainly one and the same vestiges or stamps of nature,
impressed upon different materials and subjects. And this
matter has not yet been diligently explored. You might
perhaps find in writings from higher intellects, axioms of
this kind rarely and sparsely inserted, for the purpose of
the argument they are treating: But no one has composed
any body of such *Axioms*, which have a certain primitive
and summary force for the *Sciences*; although it is a matter
of such a kind, which remarkably unifies Nature; which
they consider to be the task of *First Philosophy*.

      There is also another part of this *First Philosophy*, which,
if you regard the words, is old; if you regard the thing
which we designate, is new. It is, moreover, an *Inquiry
concerning the adventitious Conditions of Beings*, (which
we can call *Transcendentals*) such as *Few, Many;
Similar, Diverse; Possible, Impossible;* also *Being*, and
*Non-Being*, and suchlike. For since these things do not
properly fall under *Physics*, but *Dialectical Discussion* is
more suited to methods of arguing than to the existence of
things, it is entirely fitting that this *Contemplation* (in
which there is no little dignity and utility) should not

                                  L 6                     dese-

--- Page 206 ---
184 Dᴇ Aᴜɢᴍ. Sᴄɪᴇɴᴛ.
should be entirely neglected, but in the divisions of the sciences, it should at least find some place: Nevertheless, we understand that this ought to be done in a manner far different from that in which it is usually treated: For example: No one who has spoken about *Much and Little* has done so to give a reason why some things in Nature are, and can be, so numerous and abundant, while others are so rare and moderate: Certainly not.

It cannot be that in the Nature of Things there is as much gold as iron; as many roses as blades of grass; as much of the specified as of the unspecified.

Similarly, no one who has discoursed on *Similar and Diverse* has sufficiently explained why, almost perpetually, certain *Participials* are interposed between *diverse species*, which are of an ambiguous kind; such as moss between putrefaction and plant; fish that adhere and do not move from their place, between plant and animal; shrews, and mice, and some other things, between animals generated from putrefaction and those from seed; bats between birds and quadrupeds; flying fish (which are now very well known) between birds and fish; seals between fish and quadrupeds; and other things of this kind. Nor again has anyone investigated the reason why, although *like rejoices in like*, iron does not attract iron, which the magnet does; nor gold itself gold, although it attracts quicksilver.

Concerning these and similar matters, in the discussion of those *Transcendentals*, there is a profound silence: For men have pursued the pinnacles of rhetoric, not the subtleties of things. Wherefore the inquiry into these *Transcendentals or adventitious Conditions of Beings*
()                                                              inquiry
()
II
C
II

--- Page 207 ---
L I B E R III. 185
Therefore, we wish to embrace a true and solid inquiry into these *Transcendentals or Adventitious Conditions of Beings*, according to the laws of nature, not of discourse, [an inquiry which we call] *First Philosophy*. And concerning *First Philosophy* (or *Wisdom*), which we have not undeservedly included among the *Desiderata*, let this much be said.

C A P. II.
Concerning Natural Theology: and the Doctrine of Angels & Spirits; *which is an Appendix of the same.*

[Large initial C]Therefore, the *Common Parent of the Sciences* having been placed in its proper seat, like Berecynthia rejoicing in such a heavenly offspring;
*All heavenly dwellers, all who hold the heights above;*
let us return to that division of the three *Philosophies, Divine, Natural, & Human.* For *Natural Theology* is also rightly called *Divine Philosophy*. Now this is defined as being such a *Science*, or rather a spark of *Science*, as can be had concerning God, through the light of Nature, and the Contemplation of created Things: and by reason of its Object it can certainly be considered Divine, by reason of its information, natural. The limits of this *Science* are truly marked out in such a way, that they extend to refuting and convincing Atheism, and to informing the law of nature; but they do not extend to establishing religion. For this reason, God never performed a miracle by which an Atheist might be converted; because he could be led to the knowledge of God by the very Light of nature; but miracles [are] for conver-

--- Page 208 ---
186      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
were designed for converting idolaters and superstitious people, who acknowledged a Divine Being, but erred in His worship; because the Light of Nature is not sufficient for declaring God's will, or for revealing His legitimate worship. For just as the works of a craftsman show his power and skill, but by no means his image; so the Works of God, the Creator, show His omnipotence and Wisdom, but by no means depict His Image. And in this matter, the opinion of the Heathens deviates from sacred truth. For they held the World to be the Image of God, and Man to be the image of the World. But the Sacred Scriptures do not deem the World worthy of such honor, that it should anywhere be called the Image of God, but only the Work of His Hands; but Man, on the other hand, they immediately substitute as the Image of God. Wherefore, that God exists, that He governs the reins of things, that He is supremely Powerful, that He is Wise and Prescient, that He is Good, that He is a Rewarder, that He is an Avenger, that He is to be Adored, can also be demonstrated and proven from His works: and many wonderful hidden attributes of His, and much more concerning His governance and dispensation over the universe, can also be soberly deduced and manifested from the same; and this argument has been usefully handled by some. But from the contemplation of natural things, and the principles of human reason, either to reason about the mysteries of faith, or even to persuade more vehemently, or again to examine them more curiously, and to ventilate them, and to inquire into the manner of the Mystery, would not be safe in my judgment. Give to faith what belongs to faith

--- Page 209 ---
LIBER III. 187

which are God's. For even the Pagans, in that famous and divine fable of the golden chain, concede this very thing: that *neither men nor gods could draw Jupiter from Heaven to Earth; on the contrary, Jupiter could draw them from Earth to Heaven*. Therefore, he will have toiled in vain who tries to adapt the heavenly mysteries of Religion to our reason: It will be more fitting, rather, to raise our minds to adore the Throne of heavenly truth. In this part, therefore, of *Natural Theology*, so far am I from observing any defect, that I rather find an excess; to note which I have digressed a little, because of the very great disadvantages and dangers which threaten both Religion and Philosophy from it; inasmuch as it both forges Heretical Religion and Fantastic and Superstitious Philosophy.

It is otherwise concerning the nature of *Angels and Spirits*; which is neither inscrutable nor forbidden; to which access is largely opened, also, due to the affinity it has with the human soul. Sacred Scripture certainly commands: *Let no one deceive you in loftiness of words, and in the worship of Angels, intruding into those things which he has not known*. Yet if you diligently weigh this warning, you will find only two things forbidden in it; namely, the adoration of Angels, such as is due to God; and fanatical opinions about them, either exalting them beyond the lot of a creature, or peddling a greater knowledge of them than one has truly acquired. But a sober inquiry concerning them, which either through things

--- Page 210 ---
188 D E A U G M. S C I E N T.
the ladder of corporeal things to thoroughly know their nature; or contemplates it in the human soul, as in a mirror, is by no means forbidden. The same is to be established concerning *Unclean* Spirits, who have fallen from their state. Fellowship with them, and the use of their service, is illicit, much more any kind of worship or veneration. But the contemplation and knowledge of their nature, power, illusions, not only from passages of Sacred Scripture, but from reason, or experience, is by no means the least part of spiritual wisdom. Thus certainly the Apostle (said), *We are not ignorant of his devices*. And it is no less permitted *to investigate the Nature of Demons in Natural Theology* than *of Poisons in Physics*, or *of Vices in Ethics*. This part of Science, however, concerning *Angels and Demons*, it is not permitted to number among the *Desiderata*, since it has been attempted by not a few: It would be more just that not a small part of the writings in this genre be accused of either vanity, or superstition, or useless subtlety.

C A P. I I I.
*The Division of Natural Philosophy into Speculative &*
*Operative: and that these two ought to be separated, both in the intention*
*of the Author, and in the Body of the Treatise.*

[M] Therefore, having dismissed *Natural Theology* (to which we have attributed the inquiry concerning Spirits, as an appendix), let us proceed to the second part, namely that concerning *Nature, or Natural Philosophy.*

--- Page 211 ---
**BOOK III. 189**

natural philosophy. Democritus said it best: that the knowledge of Nature lies submerged in the depths of mines or wells. Not badly do the Chemists say: that Vulcan is a second Nature, and indeed accomplishes quickly what Nature usually does through circuitous ways and delays of time. Why then should we not divide Philosophy into two parts, the Mine and the Furnace; and establish two offices for Philosophers, Workers in the Mines, and Smiths? Indeed, however much we may seem to speak these things in jest; nevertheless, we consider this kind of division to be most useful when it is proposed in familiar and scholastic terms; that is, that the Doctrine of Nature be divided into the investigation of causes and the production of effects; Speculative and Operative. The one scrutinizes the inner workings of Nature, the other shapes Nature as if upon an anvil. Nor does it escape me by how close a bond Cause and effect are joined, so that their explanation must to some extent be connected. Yet, since all solid and fruitful Natural Philosophy employs a double scale, and that a diverse one; Ascending and Descending; From Experience to Axioms, and from Axioms to new Inventions, I judge it most advisable that these two Parts, Speculative and Operative, be separated both in the intention of the Author and in the body of the Treatise.

**CHAPTER IV.**
Division of the speculative doctrine of Nature into Special Physics and Metaphysics: of which Physics [deals with] Cau-

---
**Note:** There is a handwritten marginal note "193." next to "production of effects". The following text has been underlined by hand: "this kind of division to be most useful when it is proposed in familiar and scholastic terms; that is, that the Doctrine of Nature be divided into the investigation of causes and the production of effects; Speculative and Operative. The one scrutinizes the inner workings of Nature, the other shapes Nature as if upon an anvil."

--- Page 212 ---
190      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
Efficient Cause & Matter; *Metaphysics*
inquires into the Final Cause & Form. *The Division*
*of Physics* into doctrines concerning the Principles of things, concerning the fabric
of things *or of the world,* & concerning the variety of things. *The Di-*
*vision of Physics* concerning the variety of things, into the doctrine of
*Concretes,* & the doctrine of *Abstracts. The division* of the do-
ctrine of *Concretes,* is referred to the same divisions,
which natural history embraces. *The division* of the doctrine of
*Abstracts* into the doctrine of the *Schematisms of Matter,*
& the doctrine of *Motions. Two Appendices of Speculative Physics,*
*Natural Problems, the Opinions of ancient*
*Philosophers. The division of Metaphysics,* into
the doctrine of *Forms,* & the doctrine of *Final*
*Causes.*

[Large initial N] *It is pleasing to divide that part of Natural Philosophy which is Specu-*
*lative and Theoretical, into Special Physics*
*and Metaphysics.* And in this division, let men attend,

--- Page 213 ---
LIBER III. 191

...or deviate from the received manner of speaking. In this regard, it is therefore surprising to consider Aristotle's confidence; who, driven by a certain impulse of contradiction, and declaring war on all Antiquity, not only usurped the liberty of coining new terms of the arts at will; but also endeavored to extinguish and destroy all ancient wisdom. So much so that he nowhere names ancient authors, nor makes any mention of their doctrines, except to disparage men or refute their tenets. Indeed, if he sought fame for his name and a crowd of followers, this was especially suited to his purposes. For indeed, in asserting and receiving philosophical truth, the same thing happens as in divine truth; *“I came in the name of the Father, and you do not receive me; if anyone comes in his own name, him you will receive.”* But from this heavenly aphorism, if we consider whom it especially designates; (namely, the Antichrist, the greatest Impostor of all ages) it can be gathered that this very act of *“coming in one’s own name”*, with no regard for Antiquity, or (if I may so speak) Paternity, is a thing of ill omen for truth; however often that fortune, *“Him you will receive,”* may accompany it. Moreover, concerning a man so certainly excellent, and admirable for the sharpness of his intellect, Aristotle, I would readily believe that he received this ambition from his disciple, whom perhaps he emulated; so that just as the former subdued all nations, the latter might subdue all opinions, and establish a kind of Monarchy for himself in contemplations. Quan-

--- Page 214 ---
192          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
Although it might happen that among some morose and sharp-tongued individuals, he might be marked with a similar title to his student:
   *Fortunate plunderer of lands, an example*
   *Born not useful to the world:* ——
In the same way,
   *Fortunate plunderer of doctrine, etc.*
But for us, on the other hand (for whom, as far as we are able with the pen, it is dear to our heart to establish a covenant and commerce between old and new in letters), the resolution remains to accompany Antiquity *even to the altars*; and to retain ancient words, although we often change their meaning and definitions; according to that moderate and praised method of innovation in civil affairs, by which, even when the state of affairs is changed, the solemnity of the words nevertheless endures; which Tacitus notes: *The same names of magistracies.*
   Let us return therefore to the understanding of the word *Metaphysics*, in our sense. It is clear from what we have discussed above that we separate *First Philosophy* from *Metaphysics*, which hitherto have been considered as the same thing. The former we have posited as the *common parent of the sciences*, the latter as a *portion of Natural Philosophy*. But to *First Philosophy* we have assigned the common and general *Axioms* of the sciences. Also *Relative* conditions; and *Adventitious Conditions of Beings* (which we have named *Transcendent*)—*Much, Little; Same, Different; Possible, Impossible;* and the rest of this kind—we attribute to the same; only taking care that they are treated physically, not logically.

--- Page 215 ---
LIBER III. 193
that they be treated. But we have referred the inquiry concerning God, the One, the Good, Angels, Spirits, to Natural Theology. Therefore, it can rightly be asked, what finally is left to Metaphysics? Certainly nothing beyond Nature, but the most excellent part of Nature itself. And indeed, without detriment to truth, it may thus far be permitted to answer according to the opinion of the ancients, that Physics treats those things which are deeply immersed in Matter and are Mobile; Metaphysics [treats] things more Abstract and Constant. Again, that Physics in Nature presupposes only existence, and motion, and natural necessity: But Metaphysics also [presupposes] mind and Idea. For perhaps the matter we are about to discuss returns to this point. But we, setting aside the sublimity of discourse, will propose it clearly and familiarly. We have divided Natural Philosophy into the inquiry into causes, and the production of effects. The inquiry into Causes we have placed in Theory. This we have divided into Physics and Metaphysics. Therefore it is necessary that the true difference between these be taken from the nature of the causes which they investigate. And so, without any obscurity or circumlocution, Physics is that which inquires concerning the Efficient Cause and Matter; Metaphysics, that which [inquires] concerning Form and End. [marginal note: 189.]

Physics, therefore, is vague and uncertain in its Causes, and according to the nature of the subject, embraces mobile things; it does not attain the constancy of causes.

As this mud hardens, and as this wax melts, by one and the same fire. ——

103
Ignis

--- Page 216 ---
194          ON THE AUGMENTATION OF SCIENCES
Fire is the cause of hardness, but in mud; Fire is the cause of me-
lting, but in wax. We will divide *Physics* however
*into three doctrines. For Nature is either*
*Collected into one; or diffused and scattered. Nature is*
*truly collected into one, either because of the common*
*principles of all things; or because of the unique integral*
*fabric of the universe.* Therefore
this Unity of Nature has given birth to two parts of *Physics*:
one concerning the *principles of things*; the other concerning the *fabric*
*of the Universe, or concerning the world*, which we are also accustomed to call *Doctrines*
*of the highest things*. The third doctrine
(which treats of *Nature scattered or diffused*)
exhibits the entire variety of things, and *minor categories*.
From these, therefore, it is clear that there are altogether three
*physical doctrines* to be found. Concerning the *Principles*
*of Things*; Concerning the *World or the Fabric of Things*; and
concerning *Nature manifold or scattered*; which last
(as we said) contains the entire variety of things;
and is like a primary gloss, or
Paraphrase concerning the interpretation of Nature.
Of these three parts, none is *totally lacking*;
However, how truly and solidly they are treated,
this is not the place to define.
   But *scattered Physics or concerning the variety of things*,
*of things*, we again divide into two parts; *Physics*
*of Concretes, and Physics of Natures.* The former
(to use logical terms) inquires about
substances, with all the variety of their accidents:
The latter about accidents, through all
the variety of substances. For example, if one inquires
about a lion, or an oak, those support several different
accidents: Conversely, if one inquires
                                                                      about

--- Page 217 ---
L I B E R III. 195
...about heat, or gravity, these are present in very many distinct substances. But since all *Physics* is situated in the middle, between *Natural History* and *Metaphysics*, the former part (if you observe correctly) is closer to *Natural History*, the latter to *Metaphysics*. *Concrete Physics*, however, undergoes the same division as *Natural History*: so that it is either about *Celestial things*; or about *Meteors*; or about the *Globe of earth* & *Sea*; or about *greater Collections*, which they call *Elements*; or about *lesser Collections*, or *Species*; also about *Pretergenerations*; and about *Mechanics*. For in all these things, *Natural History* investigates and reports the fact itself; but *Physics* likewise (investigates) the Causes: but understand this concerning *flowing Causes*, namely *matter* and the *Efficient* (cause). Among these portions of *Physics*, that which inquires about *Celestial things* is entirely defective and imperfect, although on account of the nobility of the subject it ought to be of principal concern to humans. For *Astronomy* is founded on Phenomena not badly; but it is humble, and by no means solid: But *Astrology* also lacks foundation in very many things. Certainly *Astronomy* offers such a victim to the human intellect, as Prometheus once did, when he played a trick on Jove: He brought, instead of a true ox, the hide of a large and beautiful ox, stuffed with straw, and leaves, and twigs. Similarly, *Astronomy* exhibits the exteriors of Celestial things (we mean the number, position, motions, periods of the *Stars*) as the hide of the Sky, beautiful, and skillfully arranged into Systems: But the entrails are missing
                                                                    (ratio-

--- Page 218 ---
196      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
(namely, physical reasons) from which (with astronomical hypotheses added) a theory may be deduced, not one that merely satisfies the phenomena (of which kind many could be ingeniously devised), but one that proposes the substance, and motion, and influence of celestial bodies, as they truly are. For those things have long since been almost exploded: the 'Raptus primi mobilis' (the carrying away of the prime mobile), and the Solidity of the Heavens (with stars fixed in their Orbs like nails in ceilings). Nor is it much better asserted: That there are different Poles of the Zodiac and the World; That there is a Second Mobile of Resistance against the carrying away of the prime mobile; That all things in the Heavens are carried in perfect Circles; That there are Eccentrics and Epicycles, by which the constancy of motions in perfect Circles is preserved; That from the Moon upwards there is no Change or Violence; And suchlike. And the absurdity of these suppositions drove men to the diurnal motion of the earth (which we know to be most false). But scarcely anyone has inquired into the physical causes, both concerning the Substance of Celestial bodies, both Stellar and Interstellar, and concerning the Celerity and Tardiness of Celestial Bodies relative to each other, and concerning the diverse Excitation of Motion in the same Planet, and concerning the Succession of Motions from East to West, or vice versa, and concerning Progressions, Stations, and Retrogradations, and concerning the Elevation and Fall of Motions, through Apogees and Perigees, and concerning the Obligation of Motions, either by weaving and unweaving themselves in spirals towards the Tropics, or by the sinuations which they call Dragons,

--- Page 219 ---
L I B E R III.           197
which they call Dragons; then concerning the *Poles of Reasons*, why they are situated more in one part of the heavens than in another; then concerning the *Binding of certain Planets to a certain Distance from the Sun*: An inquiry, I say, of this kind has scarcely been attempted, but one toils only in *Mathematical Observations and Demonstrations*. But these show how all these things can be ingeniously arranged and disentangled, not how they truly subsist in Nature. And they indicate only apparent motions, and their fictitious mechanism, arbitrarily arranged, not the causes themselves, and the truth of things.
Wherefore *Astronomy*, as it is now held, is wrongly numbered among the *Mathematical Arts*, not without detriment to its dignity; since it ought rather, if it wishes to maintain its proper role, to be constituted as the noblest part, as it were, of *Physics*. For whoever contemplates the fictitious divorces of *Superlunary and Sublunary* (things), and has well perceived the *Appetites of Matter and the most Universal Passions* (which are strong in both globes, and penetrate the universality of things); that person will gain from those things which are observed among us clear information about *Celestial Matters*, and conversely from those things which happen in the Heavens, will learn not a few things about *Inferior Motions*, which now lie hidden; not only insofar as these are governed by those, but insofar as they have common passions. Wherefore we declare this part of *Astronomy, which is Physical*, to be wanting. We shall name it *Living Astronomy*, in distinction from that ox of Prometheus,
                    K                    suffar-

--- Page 220 ---
It appears that the Latin text you wish to have translated was not provided in your request. Instead, you've provided notes and observations about the text's structure and content (e.g., line breaks, indentation, specific phrases like 'At Aſtrologia', 'mentis. Ut vero rem', 'supernumerarias').

To proceed with the translation, please provide the complete Latin text you would like translated.

If you intended for the "Previous page text for continuity" to be translated, please confirm, and I can translate that portion for you.

--- Page 221 ---
LIBER III. 199
certain doctrines, with the *distribution of houses*; namely, the very delights of *Astrology*; which performed certain Bacchanalia in the Heavens: Nor can we wonder enough that certain excellent men, and leading figures in *Astrology*, relied on such a weak argument to establish these things. For they say that, since experience itself shows that *Solstices, Equinoxes, New Moons, Full Moons*, and such *major Revolutions of the stars* manifestly and significantly operate upon natural bodies; it is necessary that *more exact* and *subtler positions of the stars* also produce more exquisite and hidden effects. But they ought first to have set aside the *operations of the sun through manifest heat*; and similarly, a certain *Magnetic force of the Moon* upon the semi-monthly increases of tides: (for the daily ebb and flow of the sea is another matter:) but these having been set aside, they will find the remaining *forces of the Planets* upon natural things (insofar as they are proven by experience) to be very weak, and infirm, and as it were hidden, even in *major Revolutions*. Wherefore they ought to have concluded in a completely contrary manner. Namely; since *those major revolutions* can do so little; *those exact and minute differences of positions* obtain no power at all.

Thirdly, those *fatalistic doctrines*, that the hour of birth or conception governs the fortune of the fetus, the hour of beginning (governs) the fortune of the undertaking, the hour of the question (governs) the fortune of the thing inquired about, and (to speak in a word) the *doctrines of nativities, elections, and questions*, of such le-

--- Page 222 ---
200      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
frivolities, for the most part, to have nothing certain or soli-
d, and to be plainly refuted and disproven by physical rea-
sons, we judge. Therefore, it is more pertinent to say, what, after all, in *Astrology* do we re-
tain, or approve? And in those things which we
approve, what do we *lack*? For the sake of this
last point (namely, that which *is lacking*) we
have instituted this discourse, since otherwise
we have no leisure for criticisms (as we have often said).
And certainly among the accepted things, we judge the *doctrine of revolu-
tions* to have more soundness than the rest. But
it would be best to do this, if we prescribe certain
*Rules* by whose balance and standard *Astrology* may be examined;
so that useful things may be retained, and empty things rejected. The first
of these is that concerning which we have already warned before, *that major Revolu-
tions be retained, but minor ones of horo-
scopes and houses be invalid.* Those, like great
engines, can cast their blows from afar, these, like smaller bows, cannot reach spaces
and convey forces. The second is; *the ope-
ration of celestial bodies is not valid in all kinds of bodies,
but only in softer ones,* such as humors,
air, and spirits: And here however we make an ex-

--- Page 223 ---
            BOOK III.            201
pestilential air, occupies less resistant bodies, occu-
pies, passes over more resistant ones. The fourth is not dis-
similar to the preceding one: Every operation of celes-
tial bodies, not into points of time, or minute
intervals, but flows into and domina-
tes larger periods: Therefore, predictions about the tempera-
tures of the year can be true; but concerning individual
days, they are rightly considered va-
in. The last is, (which also always pleased the more
prudent Astrologers) that no fatal necessity is inherent
in the Stars; but that they incline rather than compel. We add
also that, (in which we shall seem to enter not obscurely
into the parts of Astrology, if it should be re-
formed) namely, that it is firmly established for us that celes-
tial bodies have in themselves certain other influences, besides
Heat and Light. Which influences themselves, however, according
to those rules, which we have already laid down, and not otherwise,
are valid. But those lie hidden in the innermost Physics, and
a longer dissertation

--- Page 224 ---
Dᴇ Aᴜɢᴍ. Sᴄɪᴇɴᴛ.
namely by conjunctions and oppositions, and the re-
maining Syzygies, or Aspects of the Planets
among themselves: *But the Planets' passage through the Signs of the Zodiac,*
*and their Location under the same Signs,*
we also assign to this part, concerning the commixtures of the
rays: For the location of a planet under
a sign, is a kind of conjunction of the same with
the stars of the sign: Moreover, just as conjunctions, so
also oppositions, and the remaining *Syzygies of the Planets,*
*towards the stars of the signs* are to be noted; which
has not yet been fully done. But the commixtures
of the rays of the fixed stars with each other, are indeed useful
for the contemplation of the fabric of the world,
and the Nature of the underlying regions; but for predictions
they are least useful, because they always behave in the same way.
Secondly, let there be received *the Approaches* of individual
Planets closer *to the Perpendicular*,
or *their Recessions* from it, according to the climates of the Regions:
For individual Planets have,
no less than the Sun, their summers, winters, in
which they cast their rays more strongly or more weakly,
on account of the reason of the perpendicular. For to us
there is no doubt that the Moon placed in Leo,
operates more strongly upon natural bodies, among
us; than when placed in Pisces: Not because the moon
under Leo looks to the heart, under Pisces to the feet
(as they fable); but because of the elevation
towards the perpendicular, and the approximation
to the larger stars, for precisely the same reason,
as the Sun. Thirdly, let there be received *the Apogees &*
*Perigees of the Planets*, with due investigation,
to what extent *the Planet's vigor in itself*
*itself,*

--- Page 225 ---
LIBER III. 203
itself, to which *Proximity* to us [pertains]. For a planet in its Apogee, or exaltation, is more vigorous; but in its Perigee, or fall, it communicates more. Fourthly, let there be taken into account (to speak summarily) all other *Accidents of planetary motion*, such as their individual *accelerations, retardations, progressions, stations, retrogradations* in their journey; such as *distance* from the Sun, *combustions, increases* & *decreases of light, eclipses*; and if there are any others. For all these things cause the rays of the planets to operate, either more weakly, or finally in diverse ways and with diverse powers. And these four points pertain to the *Radiations of the Stars*. Fifthly, let there be taken into account those things which can in any way reveal and uncover the Natures of the stars, whether wandering or fixed, in their own Essence and activity: such as *magnitude*; such as *color* & *appearance*: such as *scintillation* & *vibration of light*: such as *position towards the poles*, or the *Equinox*: Such as *Asterisms*: which are more intermingled with other stars, which are more solitary: which are superior, which are inferior; which of the fixed stars are within the *paths of the sun & planets*, (namely the *Zodiac*) which are outside: which of the Planets is *faster*, which is *slower*: which *moves in the Ecliptic*, which *wanders in latitude*: which can be *retrograde*, which least [can be retrograde]: which enjoys an *unrestricted distance from the Sun*, which is bound [to it]: which moves faster in *Apogee*, which in *Perigee*: Finally, the *Anomaly of Mars*, the *Excursion of Venus*, and the remarkable *Labors* or *Passions*, which have been observed not only once and in *Venus*.

--- Page 226 ---
204      Oɴ ᴛʜᴇ Aᴜɢᴍ. ᴏғ Sᴄɪᴇɴᴄᴇs.
have been observed: and if there are any others? Finally, let there also be received from tradition, the particular *natures and inclinations of the Planets*; and also *of the fixed stars*; which, inasmuch as they are handed down with great consensus, are not lightly (except where they plainly disagree with physical reasons) to be rejected. And from such observations is constructed *sound Astrology*; and according to these alone, ought the schemes of the heavens to be both composed and interpreted.
      However, *sound Astrology* is applied to *predictions* more confidently, to *elections* more cautiously, but to both within due limits. *Predictions* can be made concerning future *Comets*, which (as our conjecture suggests) can be foretold: and concerning every kind of *Meteors*, concerning *floods, droughts, heats, freezes, earthquakes, irruptions of waters, eruptions of fires, major winds and rains*, the various *seasons* of the year, *pestilences, widespread diseases, abundance and scarcity of crops, wars, seditions, sects, migrations of peoples*, finally, concerning all major movements or innovations of things, whether natural or civil: But for more special, and perhaps singular, *predictions*, these (though with less certainty) can be deduced, if, after first discovering the general inclinations of such times, they are applied with keen judgment, either physical or political, to those species or individuals which are most subject to such accidents; as if someone, from a foreknowledge of the year's weather, were to find
                                                                    them

--- Page 227 ---
LIBER III. 205
he will find them (for example) more favorable or harmful to olives than to vines, more to consumptives than to those with liver disease, more to inhabitants of hills than of valleys, more to monks than to courtiers (because of their different way of life). Or if someone, from the knowledge of the influence which celestial bodies have over human spirits, should find it to be such that it favors or opposes more the common people than kings; more learned and curious men than spirited and military men; more pleasure-seekers than busy or political men. Things of this kind, however, are innumerable, but (as we have said) they require not only that general knowledge which is taken from the stars (which are the agents), but also particular knowledge of the subjects (which are the passive elements). Nor are *elections* to be entirely rejected; but less trust is to be placed in them than in *predictions*. For we see that in plantings, and sowings, and graftings, observations of the moon's phases are not entirely frivolous things. There are also many things of that kind. But these *elections*, even more than *Predictions*, are to be restrained by our rules. And this must always be observed: that *Elections* are valid only in those cases where the virtue of the celestial bodies is such that it does not suddenly pass away, and the action of the inferior things is similarly such that it is not immediately completed; as happens in those examples which we have mentioned: For neither the increments of the Moon are suddenly transformed, nor the increments of Plants. But the punctuality of time is to be entirely rejected. However, many such things are also found...

--- Page 228 ---
206        Oɴ ᴛʜᴇ Aᴅᴠᴀɴᴄᴇᴍᴇɴᴛ ᴏғ Lᴇᴀʀɴɪɴɢ.
ra (which one might less suppose) in *elections concerning civil matters*. But if anyone challenges us on the grounds that, while we have shown something of what this emended *Astrology* can be deduced from, and again, to what it can be usefully applied, we have by no means taught what the method of deduction is: he would be less fair, since he demands from us the art itself (of which we are not debtors). However, concerning that very thing which he seeks, we will advise this: That there are only four ways by which a path to this science is laid. Firstly, through *future experiments*; Then, through *past experiments*; Again, through *traditions*; Lastly, through *Physical reasons*. And as for *future experiments*, what need is there to speak? since they require several centuries to gather a sufficient quantity of them; so that to entertain thoughts about them would be in vain. But as for *past experiments*; These are certainly within the power of men; although the matter is laborious, and requires much leisure. For *Astrologers* (if they are not lacking diligence) can draw all *major events* (such as floods, plagues, battles, rebellions, deaths of Kings), if they wish, and similar things, from the reliability of history: and observe the position of the heavens, not according to the subtlety of horoscopes, but according to those rules of revolutions which have been outlined by us, what it was like during those same times: so that where a manifest agreement and conspiracy of events is found, there a probable rule of *Prediction* may be established. As far as *Traditions* are concerned: It is necessary to sift them in such a way, that those which manifestly conflict with *Physical reasons*,

--- Page 229 ---
L I B E R III. 207
conflict, be removed from consideration; but those that agree with them, should also hold their own authority. Finally, as for *Physical reasons*: Those are most suited to this inquiry which investigate the universal appetites and passions of matter, and the simple and genuine motions of bodies. For by these wings one ascends most safely to those celestial material things. And so much for *sound Astrology*.
   But concerning *Astrological follies* (besides those fictions which we noted at the beginning), another division remains not to be overlooked: which, however, is usually separated from *Astrology* and transferred into what they call *Celestial Magic*. It has acquired a strange invention of human ingenuity, namely, that *some benevolent position of the Stars be captured in seals or talismans* (for example, of metal, or some gem suited to the specific intention), which might retain the happiness of that Hour, otherwise fleeting, and as it were, fix what is volatile. As he gravely complains about such a noble art among the Ancients, long since lost:
   The wondrous ring lives not by infused Olympus,
   No more does the gem bear mighty Phoebuses under a humble light,
   Or moons divided from their high axis.
Certainly the Roman Church has received the relics of Saints, and their virtues, (for in Divine and Immaterial things, the flow of time does not hinder) but that the relics of Heaven might be preserved, by which the hour, which
                                 K 6             recedes—

--- Page 230 ---
208          Oɴ ᴛʜᴇ Aᴜɢᴍᴇɴᴛᴀᴛɪᴏɴ ᴏғ Sᴄɪᴇɴᴄᴇs.
receded, and as if dead, may revive and
be continued, is mere superstition. Therefore,
let us dismiss these things, unless perhaps the Muses
have now become old women.
   We have determined that *Abstract Physics* can be most
correctly divided into two parts: *the doctrine of the schematisms
of matter*, and *the doctrine of appetites
& motions*. We will enumerate both of these briefly,
from which a certain outline of true *Abstract Physics*
can be deduced. *The schematisms of matter*
are, *dense, rare, heavy, light, hot,*
*cold, tangible, pneumatic, volatile, fixed,*
*determined, fluid, humid, dry,*
*fatty, crude, hard, soft, fragile,*
*tensile, porous, united, spirituous, jejune,*
*simple, composite, absolute, imperfectly*
*mixed, fibrous and venous, of simple position*
*or equal: similar, dissimilar: specified, non-specified:*
*organic, inorganic: animated, inanimate:*
nor do we extend the matter further. For we relegate *sensible*
and *insensible*; *rational* and *irrational*,
to *the doctrine of man*.
Indeed, there are two kinds of *appetites* and *motions*:
For they are either *simple motions*, in which
the root of all natural actions
is contained, yet according to the nature of *the schematisms
of matter*: or *composite* or *produced motions*:
from which latter *received Philosophy* (which
grasps little of the body of nature) takes its beginning.
However, such *composite motions* (such as *genera-*
                                                                 tion,

--- Page 231 ---
L I B E R III. 209
generation, corruption, & the rest) as certain weights, or sums of simple motions, rather than as primitive motions. Simple motions are: the motion of Antitypy, which they commonly call the motion to prevent the penetration of dimensions; the motion of connection, which they call the motion from the flight of a vacuum; the motion of liberty, lest preternatural compression or extension be given; the motion into a new sphere, or for rarefaction and condensation; the motion of a second connection, or lest there be a solution of continuity; the motion of greater congregation, or towards the masses of their connatural things, which is commonly called natural motion; the motion of lesser congregation, which is commonly called Sympathy and Antipathy; the disposing motion, or so that parts may be well placed in the whole; the motion of assimilation or multiplication of its own Nature upon another; the motion of excitation, where a nobler Agent excites a motion latent and dormant in another; the motion of the seal of impression, that is, operation without communication of substance; the Royal motion, or the inhibition of the other motions by a predominant motion; the motion without end, or spontaneous rotation; the motion of trepidation; or Systole and Diastole, that is, of bodies which are placed between advantages and disadvantages; finally, the motion of decubitus (lying down/rest), or the abhorrence of motion, which is also the cause of very many things. Such are the Simple Motions, which truly proceed from the inner recesses of Nature: and which, complicated, continued, alternated, restrained, repeated, and in many ways aggre-

--- Page 232 ---
210          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
aggregated, constitute those *Composite Motions*, or *Sums of Motions*, which are accepted, or similar to them. The *Sums of motions* are those celebrated motions: *Generation, Corruption, Augmentation, Diminution, Alteration, & Local Motion*; Also *Mixture, Separation, Conversion*. There remain only, as *Appendices of Physics, the Measure of Motions*: *What can Quantity do, or the Dose of Nature? What can Distance do?* (that which is not improperly called the Sphere of Virtue or Activity). *What can excitation & slowness do? What can short or long delay do? What can the force or dullness of a thing do? What can the stimulus of circumstance do?* And these are the genuine parts of *true Physics of Abstracts*. Indeed, in the *schematisms of matter*, in *Simple Motions*, in the *sums or Aggregations of motions*, & in the *measures of motions*, *Physics of Abstracts* is completed. For *Voluntary Motion in animals*; *Motion that occurs in the actions of the Senses*; *Motion of imagination, appetite & will, Motion of mind, decree, & Intellectual things*, we relegate to their proper *Doctrines*. We warn again, however, that all these things which we have mentioned are not treated further in *Physics* than as their *Matter & Efficient Cause*: for they are reconsidered in *Metaphysics*, regarding their *Forms & Ends*.
     To *Physics* we will subjoin two notable *Appendices*, which pertain not so much to matter, as to the method of inquiry: *Natural Problems*, & the *Tenets of Ancient Philosophers*. The former (pertains to) *Nature manifold or scattered*.

--- Page 233 ---
LIBER III.                                 211
...scattered *Appendix* is: The second [Appendix] is of unique *Nature*, or *of Summaries*. Both pertain to skillful doubt, which is a not-to-be-despised part of *Science*. For *Problems* embrace particular doubts; *Tenets* [embrace] general [doubts] concerning *Principles* & *Structure*. A noble example of *Problems* is in the books of *Aristotle*; which kind of work certainly deserved not only to be celebrated by the praises of posterity, but also to be continued by their labors, since new *doubts* arise daily. However, in this matter, a caution of certainly great importance must be applied. The *commemoration and proposition of doubts* has a twofold fruit in itself: One, that it fortifies *Philosophy* against errors, when that which is not plainly clear is not judged or asserted (lest error should generate error), but judgment concerning it is suspended, and it does not become positive; The other, that *Doubts*, recorded in notebooks, are so many sponges, which perpetually suck and attract the increments of *Science* to themselves.

--- Page 234 ---
**212 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.**
to the end that *Doubt* may rather be nourished than terminated or resolved. Examples of which are found everywhere, both among Jurists and among Academics: whose custom it is that, once *Doubt* has been admitted, they wish it to be perpetual, and they embrace the advantages of *Doubting* no less than those of *Asserting*: Whereas, however, that alone is the legitimate use of the intellect which makes *Certainties* out of *Doubts*, not which calls *Certainties* into *Doubt*. Wherefore, I assert that a *Calendar of Doubts*, or of *Problems* in Nature, is desired, and I approve of its being undertaken: provided care is taken that, as *Science* increases daily (which will undoubtedly happen if men listen to us), those *Doubts* which have been clearly discussed may be deleted from the Register. To this *Calendar* I would wish another, no less useful, to be added: For since in every inquiry these three things are found: *clearly True, Doubtful, clearly False*: it would be most useful to add to the *Calendar of Doubts* a *Calendar of Falsehoods*, and of popular errors, whether in Natural History or in prevailing Dogmas: lest those (falsehoods and errors) should trouble the Sciences any longer.

As to the *Tenets of the ancient Philosophers*, such as were those of *Pythagoras, Philolaus, Xenophanes, Anaxagoras, Parmenides, Leucippus, Democritus*, and others: (which men are accustomed to skim over contemptuously:) it would not be amiss to cast one's eyes upon them a little more modestly. For although Aristotle, in the manner of the Ottomans, thought he could not reign safely unless all his brothers .

--- Page 235 ---
L I B E R III. 213
all [his brothers] had destroyed: nevertheless, to those who propose to themselves not a kingdom or mastery, but the inquiry and illustration of truth, it cannot but seem a useful thing to view the diverse opinions of diverse people, concerning the natures of things, under a single aspect. Nor, however, is there hope that any purer truth, from those, or similar Theories, is to be hoped for in any way. For just as the same Phenomena, the same calculations, are consistent with both Ptolemy's Astronomical principles and Copernicus's: so that common experience, which we use, and the obvious appearance of things, can apply itself to many diverse Theories: where for the right investigation of truth, a far different severity will be needed. For Aristotle elegantly [says]: *Infants, at first babbling, call any women mothers, but afterwards discern their own mother.* Thus certainly childish experience will call every *Philosophy* a mother: but adult [experience] will recognize the true Mother. Meanwhile it will be helpful to read through differing *Philosophies*, as if diverse *Glossaries of Nature*, (of which one is perhaps more accurate in one place, another in another,). I would wish, therefore, from the ancient philosophers, from Plutarch's collection concerning their Opinions, from Aristotle's citations, from scattered mention, which is found in other books, both Ecclesiastical and Pagan, (Lactantius, Philo, Philostratus, & others) a work to be compiled, with diligence and judgment, concerning *Ancient Philosophies.* For I see that such a work does not yet exist. Nevertheless, here I advise that this be done distin-

--- Page 236 ---
214      DE AUGM. SCIENT.
distinctly: so that individual Philosophies may be composed separately and continued, not extracted by titles and fascicles (which Plutarch did). For every complete Philosophy sustains itself; and its doctrines mutually add both light and strength to each other; but if they are pulled apart, they sound foreign and harsh. Certainly, when I read the Deeds of Nero or Claudius in Tacitus, clothed in the circumstances of Times, Persons, and Occasions, I see nothing that utterly deviates from probability; but when I read the same in Suetonius Tranquillus, presented by chapters and commonplaces, and by no means in chronological order, they seem like certain monstrosities, and utterly incredible. Nor is the case of Philosophy dissimilar, when it is presented whole, and when it is cut and dissected into fragments. Nor indeed do I exclude recent Theories and doctrines from this Calendar of Philosophical Tenets; such as that of Theophrastus Paracelsus, eloquently reduced into a certain Body and Harmony of Philosophy by Severinus the Dane; or that of Telesius of Cosenza, who, restoring the Philosophy of Parmenides, turned the weapons of the Peripatetics against themselves; or that of Patricius the Venetian, who sublimated the subtleties of the Platonists; or that of our countryman Gilbert, who restored the doctrines of Philolaus; or of anyone else, provided he be worthy. But of these (since entire volumes exist), only summaries are to be made from them, and joined with the others. And let these things have been said concerning Physics with its Appendices.
                                 Quan-

--- Page 237 ---
L I B E R III.          215
As for *Metaphysics*, we have already assigned to it the inquiry into *Formal* and *Final Causes*; which assignment, as far as *Forms* are concerned, may seem to have been made in vain. For indeed, an opinion has prevailed and become inveterate, that *the essential forms of things*, or *true differences*, cannot be discovered by any human diligence. This opinion, meanwhile, grants and concedes to us that *the Invention of Forms* is the most worthy of all parts of Science to be investigated, if only it can be done, so that they may be found. But as for the possibility of invention, there are certainly lazy explorers of regions who, where nothing but Sky and Sea is seen, utterly deny that there are lands beyond. But it is manifest that Plato, a man of sublime genius (and who, as if from a high rock, surveyed all things around), in his doctrine of Ideas, saw that *Forms are the true object of Science*; however, he lost the fruit of this most true opinion by contemplating and grasping *Forms* as entirely abstracted from matter, not determined within matter: Whence it happened that he turned to Theological speculations; which infected and polluted all his natural Philosophy. But if we diligently, seriously, and sincerely turn our eyes to action and use; it will not be difficult to inquire and attain knowledge of what those *Forms* are, the knowledge of which can enrich and bless human affairs in wonderful ways. For the *Forms* of Substances (with the exception of man, concerning whom Scripture says, *He formed man from the dust of the earth, and breathed into his face the breath of life;*)

--- Page 238 ---
216 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
life; not as concerning other species, (*Let the*
*waters bring forth, let the earth bring forth*) species, I say, of crea-
tures, (as they are now found multiplied by composition and
transplantation,) are so intricate and complicated, that either to
inquire about them at all is in vain; or their inquiry,
such as it can be, should be set aside for a time, and
after the *forms* of simpler Nature have been duly ex-
plored and discovered, then at last it ought to be undertaken.
For just as it would neither be easy, nor in any way useful,
to investigate the *form* of a sound that constitutes some word,
since words, by the composition and transposition of
letters, are infinite: but to inquire into the *form* of a sound
that expresses some simple letter; by what collision, as it were,
by the application of the instruments of voice, it is constituted,
is comprehensible, indeed easy: which known Forms of let-
ters will nevertheless immediately lead us to the *forms* of words.
By the very same reasoning; one would waste one's effort by
inquiring into the *form* of a *Lion, an Oak, Gold*, indeed even
*water*, or *air*: but to inquire into the *form* of *dense, rare;*
*hot, cold; heavy, light; tangible, pneumatic, volatile, fixed;*
and similar things, both *schematisms* and *motions*, which
in treating *Physics*, we have for the most part enumerated,
(and which we are accustomed to call *forms of the first class*)
and which (like the letters of the Alphabet) are not so many
in number, and yet constitute and sustain the *Essences and Forms*
of all substances; this, I say, is that very thing which we are
attempting; and which that part

--- Page 239 ---
L I B E R III. 217
part of *Metaphysics*, about which we are now inquiring, constitutes and defines. Nor do these things prevent *Physics* from also considering the same Natures, as has been said, but only as regards *transient causes*. For example, if the *cause* of *whiteness* in snow or foam is inquired into, it is rightly stated that it is a subtle intermixture of air with water. This, however, is far from being the *form of whiteness*, since air, even when intermixed with glass powder or crystal, similarly produces *whiteness*, no less than if it were mixed with water; but that is only an *Efficient Cause*, which is nothing other than a vehicle of the *form*. But in *Metaphysics*; if an inquiry is made, you will find something of this kind. Two diaphanous bodies intermixed, with their optical portions arranged in a simple or equal order, constitute whiteness. This part of *Metaphysics* *

--- Page 240 ---
218          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
as far as reason permits) they may abbreviate; and therefore bring a
remedy to the old complaint, of *life short & art long*. But that is best
achieved by collecting and uniting the Axioms of the Sciences into more general
ones, and which are applicable to all matter of individual things. For
*sciences* are like pyramids, to which *History* &
*Experience*, as a single Base, are laid beneath;
And therefore the *natural Basis of Philosophy* is
*Natural History*: The first storey from the Base
is *Physics*; Next to the Vertex is *Metaphysics*:
As for the cone and the vertical point,
(the *work which God works from the beginning even to*
*the end: namely, the summary law of nature*) we
rightly hesitate whether human inquiry can
reach that. But these three are the true
storey-divisions of the Sciences, and among
men puffed up with their own knowledge, and God-
fighters, they are like three gigantic masses.
     *Thrice they tried to place Ossa on Pelion,*
     *And indeed to roll leafy Olympus upon Ossa.*
But among those who, emptying themselves,
refer all things to the glory of God, they are like that threefold
acclamation, *Holy, Holy, Holy*. For God is Holy
in the multitude of His works,
Holy in their order, Holy in their unity.
Wherefore that speculation of Parmenides & Plato
(although in them it was a bare speculation) nevertheless
excelled; *All things ascend by a certain ladder to unity*.
And that Science finally is more excellent than the others, which elevates the human
                                                                      intellect

--- Page 241 ---
L I B E R III. 219
...human intellect burdens least with multiplicity, which is clearly *Metaphysics*: inasmuch as it contemplates especially *those simple Forms of things*, (which we have called *Forms of the first class* above:) since, although few in number, they nevertheless constitute all variety by their commensurations and coordinations.

A second thing, which ennobles this part of *Metaphysics* concerning *forms*, is this: That it especially emancipates and liberates human power; and leads it into the amplest and most open field of operation. For *Physics* directs human effort through narrow and obstructed paths; imitating the winding tracks of ordinary Nature. But *wide on all sides are the ways for the wise*; Wisdom, indeed (which was defined by the ancients as *the knowledge of divine and human things*), always provides an abundance and variety of means. *For Physical Causes*, with new discoveries in similar matter, shed light...

--- Page 242 ---
220          On the Advancement of Learning.
as we note it badly placed. For they are usually investigated under *Physics*, not under *Metaphysics*. Although if this were only a fault of order, it would not have been so important to me. For order pertains to illustration, and is not of the substance of the Sciences. But this inversion of order has brought forth a significant defect, and has introduced the greatest calamity to Philosophy. For the treatment of *final causes* in *Physics* has expelled and cast down the inquiry into *physical causes*, and has caused men to acquiesce in such specious and shadowy causes, nor vigorously to pursue the inquiry into *real*, and truly *physical causes*, to the great detriment of the Sciences. Indeed, I find that this has been done not only by Plato, who always casts anchor on this shore, but also by Aristotle, Galen, and others, who very often run aground on those shoals. Indeed, whoever has adduced causes of this kind: *that eyelids with hairs are for a fence and rampart, for the protection of the eyes; or that the firmness of the skin in Animals is for repelling heat and cold; or that bones are introduced by nature as columns and beams, upon which the fabric of the body may rest; or that the leaves of trees are put forth, so that fruits may suffer less from the Sun and Wind; or that clouds are formed on high, so that they may water the earth with rains; or that the Earth is made dense and solid, so that it may be a station and dwelling place for Animals; and other similar things:* such a one would not have badly alleged these things in *Metaphysics*, but by no means in *Physics*. Indeed, what we began to say, the discourse of such speeches (like a remo-

--- Page 243 ---
L I B E R III.          221
remoras) as they imagine (clinging to ships) have retarded the quasi-sailing and progress of the Sciences, lest they hold their course and proceed further; and long ago they brought it about that the *inquiry into physical causes*, neglected, should fail and be passed over in silence. Therefore, the *natural philosophy* of Democritus, and of others, who removed God and mind from the fabric of things; and attributed the structure of the universe to infinite preludes and attempts of Nature (which they called by one name *fate* or *fortune*); and assigned the *causes* of particular things to the necessity of matter, without the intermixture of *final causes*; seems to us (as far as one can conjecture from the fragments and remnants of their philosophy), as far as *Physical causes* are concerned, to have been much more solid, and to have penetrated deeper into Nature; than that of Aristotle and Plato: For this sole reason, that the former never wasted effort on *final causes*; while the latter perpetually inculcated them. And in this respect Aristotle is more to be accused than Plato: inasmuch as he omitted the source of *final causes*, namely *God*, and substituted *Nature* for *God*, and embraced *final causes themselves*, more as a Lover of Logic than of Theology. Nor do we say this because *those final causes* are not true, and very worthy of inquiry in the speculations of *Metaphysics*, but because while they run out and rush into the possessions of *Physical Causes*, they miserably depopulate and lay waste that province. Otherwise, if
          L                    only

--- Page 244 ---
**222          On the Advancement of Learning.**
provided they are confined within their own limits: they are greatly mistaken, whoever thinks that they are contrary to or repugnant to *Physical causes*. For the reason given, that *the hairs of the eyelids protect the eyes*, by no means truly contradicts that other reason, *that hairiness usually occurs at the orifices of moistures*,
               *Mossy springs*, etc.
Nor does the reason given, that *the firmness of skins in animals serves to repel the injuries of the sky (weather)*, contradict that other reason, *that that firmness is due to the contraction of pores, from the inner parts of bodies, through cold, and the wearing away of the air.* And so of the rest: Both kinds of causes agreeing excellently; except that the one denotes intention, the other a simple consequence. Nor indeed does this matter call divine providence into doubt, or detract anything from it: but rather confirms and exalts it in wonderful ways. For just as in civil matters political prudence would be much higher and more wonderful, if someone could use the works of others for his own ends and desires, to whom nevertheless he imparts nothing of his counsel, (so that meanwhile they do what he himself wishes, but by no means understand that they are doing this,) than if he were to communicate his counsels with the Ministers of his will: So God's Wisdom shines forth more wonderfully, when Nature does one thing, and providence elicits another; than if the characters of providence were impressed upon individual schemes and natural motions. Indeed, for Aristotle, after he had impregnated Nature with *Final Causes*: Nature-

--- Page 245 ---
L I B E R III. 223

that Nature does nothing in vain, and always achieves its purpose (if impediments were absent), and had posited many such things pertaining to it, there was no further need for God. But Democritus and Epicurus, when they proclaimed their Atoms, were tolerated up to that point by some more subtle thinkers; but when they asserted that the very fabric of things had come together from their fortuitous concourse, without a mind, they were met with laughter by all. So far is it from the case that *Physical Causes* lead men away from God and Providence, that on the contrary, those philosophers who were occupied in discovering them, find no solution to the matter, unless they ultimately take refuge in God and Providence. And let these things be said concerning *Metaphysics*: a part of which, concerning *Final Causes*, I would not deny has been treated in both *Physical* and *Metaphysical* Books, in the latter correctly, in the former wrongly, because of the inconvenience that followed from it.

C A P. V.

*Division of the Operative Doctrine of Nature into Mechanics, & Magic: Which correspond to the Parts of the Speculative [Doctrine]: To Physics, Mechanics; to Metaphysics, Magic: & Expurgation of the Term Magic. Two Appendices of the Operative [Doctrine]; Inventory of the Operative [Doctrine]; Inventory of Human Powers, & Catalogue of Polychrests.*

The Operative [Doctrine] concerning *Nature* we will similarly divide into two parts, and that from a certain necessity. For this division is subordinate to the prior division of the *Speculative Doctrine*. *Physics* indeed, and the inquiry into *Efficient* and *Material*
L 2

--- Page 246 ---
toteles promiscuously; Hero in pneu-
matics; also Georgius Agricola, a writer
of recent times, very diligently in Minerals;
And very many others in particular sub-
jects: so that I have nothing to say about omis-
sions in this part; except that Mechanics gen-
                                                                eral,

--- Page 247 ---
**BOOK III. 225**

promiscuous, following the example of Aristotle, ought to have been continued more diligently, through the labors of the Moderns; especially with a selection of those Mechanics whose Causes are more obscure, or whose Effects are more noble. But those who insist on these things, as it were, merely creep along the maritime shores.
***Premendo littus iniquum.***
Indeed, in my judgment, hardly anything in Nature can be fundamentally changed or innovated, either by some fortuitous accidents, or by experimental trials, or from the light of Physical Causes, but only through the *invention of forms*. If therefore we have posited that that part of *Metaphysics* which *deals with forms* is wanting; it follows that *Natural Magic* also, which is relative to it, is similarly wanting. But in this place it seems necessary to demand that this word *Magic*, long since accepted in a pejorative sense, be restored to its ancient and honorable meaning. For *Magic* among the Persians was understood as sublime wisdom, and the science of the universal harmonies of things; and also those three Kings who came from the East to adore *Christ* were called by the name of *Magi*. But we understand it in that sense, that it is a science which leads the knowledge of *hidden forms* to admirable works, and, as is usually said, *by joining actives with passives*, reveals the great works of Nature. For as to *Natural Magic* (which flits about in the books of most people) it contains certain credulous and superstitious traditions and observations concerning *Sympathies*
L 3 & An-

--- Page 248 ---
...and Antipathies of things, and embracing Occult and specific properties, with mostly frivolous experiments, admirable more for the artifice of concealment and disguise, than for the thing itself: one would certainly not err, who said that it differs from the science we seek, as much in respect to the truth of nature, as the Books of the deeds of Arthur from Britain, or Hugh of Bordeaux, and such shadowy Heroes, differ from Caesar's Commentaries, in respect to historical truth.

For it is manifest that Caesar truly accomplished greater things than they dared to invent about their Heroes; but by methods of doing that were by no means fabulous.

The Fable of Ixion well shadowed forth such doctrines; Who, when he mentally desired cohabitation with Juno, the Goddess of Power, had the deed with an evanescent cloud; from which he begot Centaurs and Chimaeras.

Thus those who are carried by insane and impotent desire towards those things which they think they discern only through the smoke and mists of imagination, instead of works, will receive nothing but empty hopes, and certain deformed and monstrous specters.

The operation of this light and degenerate *Natural Magic* upon men, however, is similar to certain soporific medicines; which induce sleep, and moreover, while sleeping, send in pleasant and delightful dreams. For first it casts the human intellect into a slumber; by singing of specific properties, and occult virtues, and as if sent down from heaven, and to be learned only through the whispers of traditions; un-

--- Page 249 ---
LIBER III. 227

pe-
sti-
cul-
mi-
,
10-
ge-
ur-
ti-
o-
i-
l-

...men are no longer stirred up and awakened to discover and investigate true Causes, but acquiesce in such idle and credulous opinions. Then indeed it insinuates innumerable pleasing fictions, and such as one would most wish for, like dreams. And it is worth noting that in those sciences which draw too much from fantasy and faith (such as this light *Magic* of which we are now speaking, *Alchemy*, *Astrology*, and other similar ones), their means and Theory are usually more monstrous than the End and the action towards which they tend. The transmutation of silver, or quicksilver, or any other metal into gold, is a thing hard to believe: Yet it is far more probable that gold could at last be produced by much sagacious effort by a man who has known and understood the natures of *Weight*, *Yellow Color*, *Malleability* and *Extensibility*, and also of *Fixedness* and *Volatility*; and who has similarly diligently examined the primary seeds and menstrua of minerals; than that a few grains of *Elixir* could, in a few moments, turn other metals into gold through the activity of the same *Elixir*, which is supposedly able to perfect nature and free it from every impediment. Similarly, the retardation of old age, or the restoration of some degree of youth, may not easily find belief: Yet it is far more probable that by a man who thoroughly understands the nature of *Desiccation* and the *depredations of Spirits upon solid bodies*, and who has grasped the Nature of *assimilation* and *alimentation*, whether more perfect or more corrupt, and *also the Nature of Spirits*,
L 4 and as it were

--- Page 250 ---
228 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
& as it were, the *Flame of the Body*, sometimes applied to consume, sometimes to repair, has noted that life can be prolonged, or the vigor of youth, in some part, renewed, through diets, baths, unctions, proper medicines, also suitable exercises, and similar things: than that this can be done by a few drops or scruples of some *precious liquor*, or *quintessence*. Again, that fates can be drawn from the stars, men will not immediately or easily agree: But that the hour of birth, (which very often, by several natural accidents, is either accelerated or deferred,) should rule the fortune of the whole life, or that the hour of a question should be co-fated with the thing itself that is sought, you would call mere trifles. Yet such impotence and intemperance afflict the human race, that they not only promise themselves what cannot be done, but also trust that they can attain the most arduous things, without trouble or sweat, as if on holiday. But enough of *Magic* for now, whose very name we have vindicated from infamy, and separated the true kind from the false and ignoble.
But of this *Operative* part, namely concerning *Nature*, there are two *Appendices*, both of great value. The first is, that an *Inventory of human resources* be made, in which all human goods and fortunes may be received and briefly enumerated, (whether they are from the fruits and products of Nature, or of art) which are now possessed, and which men enjoy, with the addition of those things which are known to have been known in the past, but have now perished: to this end, that those who

--- Page 251 ---
L I B E R   I I I. 229
who prepares himself for new inventions should not trouble himself with things already discovered and existing. But this *Inventory* will be more ingenious and even more useful, if you add those things which are considered *impossible* by common human opinion in each category: and at the same time, you connect those things *closest to the impossible* which are nevertheless possessed, so that the one may sharpen human invention, the other may direct it to some extent, and so that from these *Desirables & Potentials, Actives* may be more readily deduced. The second is, that a *Calendar* be made of those experiments which are most *Polychresta* (multi-useful), and which contribute to, and lead to, the invention of others. For example, the *experiment of artificial congelation of water*, by ice with black salt, pertains to countless things: For this reveals a secret method of condensation, than which nothing is more fruitful for man. For fire is readily available for rarefactions; but in condensations, there is labor. Moreover, it greatly contributes to the efficiency of discovery, if such *Polychresta* are set aside in their own catalog.

C A P.  V I.
*Concerning the great appendix of Natural Philosophy, both Speculative and Operative, namely Mathematics: and that it ought to be placed among the appendices rather than among the substantive sciences. The division of Mathematics into pure and mixed.*

[Large initial O] Aristotle rightly says, *that Physics and Mathematics generate Practice or Mechanics.* Therefore, since now, both *Speculative*,
L 5 *and*

[Marginal note on the left, partially cut off:]
en-
it,
as
fi-
u-
oc
-
-
-

--- Page 252 ---
230 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCES.
...as well as the Operative part of the *Doctrine* of *Nature*, it is now time to speak of *Mathematics*, which is an auxiliary science to both. Indeed, in accepted Philosophy, this is added as a third part to *Physics* & *Metaphysics*. But for us, reconsidering and reviewing these matters, if it were our intention to designate it as a *substantive* and principal *science*, it would seem more consistent, both with the Nature of the thing itself and with the clarity of order, that it should be constituted as a portion of *Metaphysics*. For *Quantity* (which is the subject of *Mathematics*), when applied to matter, is, as it were, a dose of Nature, and causative of very many effects in Natural things; and therefore is to be numbered among the *Essential Forms*. But *Figure* and the power *of numbers* seemed to hold so much sway among the ancients, that Democritus chiefly placed the *principles of the variety of things* in the *figures of atoms*; And Pythagoras asserted that the *Nature of things* is constituted *from numbers*. Meanwhile, it is true that quantity, among *natural forms* (as we understand them), is of all things most abstract, and separable from matter: This very fact was the cause why it has been both more diligently cultivated and more keenly investigated by men, than any other *forms* whatever, all of which are more immersed in matter. For since it is plainly ingrained in the minds of men (certainly with very great detriment to the sciences) that they delight more in the *free fields, as it were, of generals*, than in the *woods and enclosures of particulars*, nothing has been found more agreeable and pleasant to *Mathematicians*, by which to appe-

--- Page 253 ---
LIBER III. 231

that desire for broad exploration and contemplation might be explored. But even if these things are true; nevertheless, for us, who consult not only truth and order, but also the use and advantages of men, it finally seemed better to designate *Mathematics*, since it is very powerful both in *Physics*, and in *Metaphysics*, and in *Magic*, as an appendix to all these, and as auxiliary forces. Which we are also compelled to do in a certain way, because of the delights and pride of *Mathematicians*, who desire that this science should almost rule *Physics*. For I do not know by what fate it happens, that *Mathematics* and *Logic*, which ought to behave as handmaidens towards *Physics*, nevertheless, boasting their certainty before it, presume to exercise dominion against it. But concerning the place and dignity of this science, less attention should be paid: let us see about the thing itself.

   *Mathematics* is either pure or mixed. To *pure* are referred sciences which are occupied with quantity, completely abstracted from *Matter and Physical Axioms*. These two are, *Geometry* and *Arithmetic*: the one treating *continuous Quantity*, the other *discrete*. Which two arts have certainly been investigated and treated with great acuteness and industry: nevertheless, to *Euclid's* labors, in *Geometry*, nothing has been added by those who followed, that is worthy of the interval of so many centuries; and the *doctrine of solids*, neither by the ancients, nor by the moderns, has been developed and augmented for the use and excellence of the subject. But in *Arithmetic*, neither sufficiently varied and convenient in-
                               L 6                      ven-

--- Page 254 ---
232 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
inventions of computational shortcuts, especially concerning Progressions, the use of which in Physics is not insignificant: nor is Algebra well perfected: and that Pythagorean and Mystical Arithmetic, which began to be restored from Proclus and certain remnants of Euclid, is a kind of expansion of speculation. For this is characteristic of the human intellect, that when it cannot cope with solid matters, it wastes itself on trivialities. *Mixed* [Mathematics] has as its subject *Physical Axioms* and *Portions*: but it considers *Quantity* insofar as it is auxiliary for elucidating, and demonstrating, and actualizing them. Indeed, many parts of Nature can neither be comprehended subtly enough, nor demonstrated clearly enough, nor accommodated skillfully and certainly enough for use, without the aid and intervention of *Mathematics*. Of this kind are *Perspective*, *Music*, *As*

--- Page 255 ---
LIBER III.                                 233
just as the desire for dissent is far from us,
so also is the intention to contend. If these things
are true;
      *We do not sing to the deaf, all the woods*
      *respond.*
   The voice of Nature will echo, even if the voice of men
protests. But just as Alexander Borgia used to
say concerning the Neapolitan expedition of the French,
that they had come with chalk *in their hands, with which*
*they might mark their lodgings, not with arms, so that*
*they might break through;* So to us the Peaceful Entry
of Truth is more at heart; where minds might be marked,
as it were, with chalk, which can only receive a guest;
rather than one who is combative, and who paves a way
for himself through disputes and quarrels. Therefore,
having completed the two parts of *Philosophy*, concerning
Divinity, and concerning Nature; the third part remains,
concerning *Man.*

[A decorative floral tailpiece ornament]

                                                     FRAN-

--- Page 256 ---
FRANCIS BACON
OF VERULAM,
Viscount St. Alban,
Concerning the Dignity and Advancement
of the Sciences,
BOOK FOURTH.
To his King.

CHAPTER I.
Division of the doctrine concerning man, into the Philosophy of Human-
ity, and Civil Philosophy. Division of the Philosophy of Human-
ity, into the doctrine concerning the body of man, and the doc-
trine concerning the soul of man. Establishment of one general doc-
trine concerning Nature, or, concerning the state of man. Di-
vision of the doctrine concerning the state of man, into the doctrine concerning
the person of man, and concerning the union of mind and body.
Division of the doctrine concerning the person of man, into the doctrine
concerning the miseries of man, and concerning his prerogatives. Division
of the doctrine concerning the union, into the doctrine concerning indica-
tions, and concerning impressions. Assignment of Physiogno-
my, and the interpretation of natural dreams,
to the doctrine concerning indications.

IF anyone (most excellent King) on account of anything
of those things which I have proposed, or shall here-
after propose, should attack or wound me,
(besides that I ought to be safe within the safeguards of your Majesty,)
let him know that he acts contrary to the custom and discipline of warfare.
For I am only a Trumpeter, I do not enter the battle,
perhaps one of those of whom Homer says:
Rejoice

--- Page 257 ---
L I B E R IV. 235
Hail, heralds, messengers of Zeus, and of men.
For these, even among the most hostile and bitter enemies, passed everywhere inviolate, going to and fro. Nor indeed does our Trumpet summon and rouse men to tear each other apart with contradictions, or to fight and contend among themselves; but rather that, having made peace among themselves, with united forces, they may prepare themselves against _the Nature of Things_, and capture and conquer its Works and Fortifications, and extend the boundaries of human empire (as far as God, Most Good, Most Great, in His Goodness shall permit).

Let us now come to that _Science_ to which the ancient _Oracle_ leads us: namely, to _the Science of ourselves_. To which, the more it concerns us, the more diligently must we apply ourselves. This _Science_ is for man the end of _Sciences_, but only a _portion of Nature itself_. And let this be laid down as a general _Rule_: That all divisions of the Sciences be so understood and applied, that they rather mark or distinguish the sciences, than cut and tear them apart, so that the _solution of continuity in the sciences_ may be perpetually avoided. For the contrary of this has rendered particular Sciences sterile, empty, and erroneous, while they are not nourished, sustained, and rectified by a common source and stimulus. Thus we see Cicero the Orator complaining about Socrates and his school, that he was the first to separate _Philosophy from Rhetoric_, whence _Rhetoric_ became a verbose and empty art. It is likewise evident, Senten-

--- Page 258 ---
236 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
It is similarly clear that Copernicus's theory concerning the Earth's system (which now also prevails), because it does not conflict with phenomena, cannot be refuted by Astronomical Principles; but it can be, by the *Principles of Natural Philosophy*, rightly established. Finally, we see that the Medical Art, if it is abandoned by *Natural Philosophy*, does not much surpass the practice of empirics.

This, therefore, being established, let us proceed to the *Doctrine concerning Man*. It is twofold; for it either contemplates *Man as an individual*, or *Man in a group*, and in *Society*. We call one of these the *Philosophy of Humanity*; the other, *Civil Philosophy*. The *Philosophy of Humanity*, or *Human* Philosophy, consists of parts similar to those of which man himself consists: Namely, from Sciences which concern the *Body*, and from Sciences which concern the *Soul*.

But before we pursue the Particular distributions, let us establish *one general Science, concerning the nature and state of man*: For it is certainly a worthy thing that this *Science* be emancipated, and into a *Science*

--- Page 259 ---
LIBER IV. 237

The *doctrine concerning the person of man* chiefly comprises two things; namely, contemplations concerning the *miseries of the human race*; and concerning its *prerogatives, or excellencies*. And the lamentation of *human woes* has been elegantly and copiously treated by many, both in Philosophical and Theological writings. And it is a thing both sweet and salutary at the same time.

But that [part] concerning *prerogatives* seemed to us a thing worthy to be proposed among the *Desiderata*. Most elegantly certainly Pindar (as he usually does) when praising Hiero says, "That he plucks the *summits from all virtues*." Indeed, I would think it could contribute very much to magnanimity and human dignity: if the *Ultimates* (as the Scholastics speak) or *Summits* (as Pindar) of human nature were collected; especially from the trustworthiness of history. That is, what has been the *Ultimate and Supreme* point to which human nature has ever ascended by itself, in each of the endowments of both body and mind. How great a thing is that which is related of Caesar, that he was able to *dictate* to five scribes simultaneously? Moreover, those exercises of the ancient Rhetoricians, Protagoras, Gorgias; and also of the Philosophers, Callisthenes, Posidonius, Carneades, that they were able to discuss elegantly and copiously on any theme on both sides extemporaneously; these not a little ennoble the *powers of human intellect*. But a thing less in practical use, but perhaps greater in display and faculty, than what Cicero relates concerning his master Archias; "That he [could produce] a great number of *excellent*

--- Page 260 ---
238      D E  A U G M.  S C I E N T.
of many verses, and to have been able to speak
extemporaneously on those things which were then happening.
That Cyrus or Scipio could recall the names of so many thousands
of men, a great glory of _Memory_. But the laurels
of moral virtues are no less celebrated than those
of _Intellectual_ [virtues]. How great a thing in the exercise
of _Patience_ is shown by that common story about
_Anaxarchus_, who, subjected to interrogation and tortures,
cut off his tongue (the hope of information) with his teeth,
and spat it into the mouth of the _Tyrant_? Nor is the endurance
inferior, (though far inferior in dignity,) to what
happened in our century concerning a certain _Burgundian_,
the killer of the _Prince of Orange_; He, flogged
with iron rods and torn with red-hot pincers, uttered
absolutely no groan: Nay, even when by chance something
broken fell from above onto the head of some bystander,
the wretch, already burnt and in the midst of his tortures,
laughed; He, however, a little before, when locks of hair

--- Page 261 ---
L I B E R IV.        239
the nobler parts had prevailed. Our More, however, the Chancellor of England, when the day before he was to die, a barber came to him (sent, of course, for this purpose, lest perhaps with his hair grown long he might appear more miserable to the people in the spectacle), and asked him if he wished to be shaved, he refused; and turning to the barber, he said: "*I have a dispute with the King about my head; but before that is settled, I will not incur expenses for it.*" Moreover, the same man, at the very point of death, after he had already laid his head on the fatal block, raised himself up a little again, and gently moving aside his rather long beard, he said: "*But surely this, at least, does not offend the King.*" But, lest we dwell too long on this jest, it is clear enough what we want; namely, that the *miracles of human nature*, and its ultimate powers and virtues, both of mind and body, be collected into some volume, which would be like annals of human triumphs. In this matter, we approve the plan of Valerius Maximus and C. Pliny, and we require their diligence and judgment.
    As for the *doctrine of the covenant*, or of the *Common bond of soul and body*: This can be divided into two parts. For just as between allies there exist both a mutual communication of their affairs and mutual duties; so this covenant of soul and body is similarly contained in two things: Namely, that it be described; *how these two (namely, soul and body) reveal themselves to each other, and how they act upon each other; by knowledge or indication, and by impression.* Of these

--- Page 262 ---
240	ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
...the former of which (namely, a description of how knowledge of the soul may be had from the disposition of the body, or of the body from the manifestations of the soul) has produced for us two *arts*, both of prediction: one adorned with the investigations of Aristotle, the other with those of Hippocrates. Although more recent times have polluted these arts with superstitious and fantastic mixtures, yet, purged and restored to their integrity, they have a solid foundation in nature and yield fruit useful for common life. The first is *Physiognomy*, which, through the lineaments of the body, indicates the propensities of the soul: The other is the *interpretation of natural dreams*, which reveals the state and disposition of the body from the agitations of the soul. In the former of these, I perceive a certain part to be lacking. For while Aristotle ingeniously and skillfully treated the fabric of the body while it was at rest, he omitted the same in motion (namely, the gestures of the body); which nevertheless are no less subject to the observations of art, and are of greater use. For the lineaments of the body show the general inclinations and propensities of the soul; but the movements and gestures of the mouth and other parts, moreover, declare the approaches, and times, and signs of the present disposition and will. For, to use the most apt and elegant words of Your Majesty, *The tongue strikes the ears, but Gesture addresses the eyes.* This, indeed, many ancients and astute men, whose eyes dwell on the countenances and gestures of others, and turn it to their own advantage,
			as for example...

--- Page 263 ---
L I B E R IV. 241
inasmuch as in this the greatest part of their skill and prudence is employed. Nor indeed can it be denied that this very thing is a mystical indicator of dissimulation in another, and advises men very well concerning the choices of times and opportunities for approaching persons; which is no small part of civil prudence. Let no one, however, think that skill of this kind indeed has some value concerning individual men, but does not fall under a rule. For in nearly the same manner we all laugh, and weep, and blush, and frown; and so (for the most part) concerning the more subtle movements. If anyone, however, here mentions Chiromancy, let him know that the matter is utterly vain; and in discussions of this kind, which we are treating, not even worthy of being named. But as for the interpretation of natural dreams: The matter has been handled by the labors of some, but teeming with very many absurdities. I only hint at this at present, that basis for this matter

--- Page 264 ---
242          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
The latter part of the *doctrine of the covenant*, (which we have called *impression*) has not yet
been reduced to an Art, but only incidentally, and piecemeal,
among other treatises, it sometimes intervenes. That
has the same Antistrophe as the former.
For it considers two things: *Either how and to what
extent the humors and temperament of the body change the
soul, and act upon it? Or again, how and to what extent, the
passions, or apprehensions of the soul, change the body, and
act upon it?* Of these, we sometimes see the former treated
in medical matters: but that very thing has inserted itself
in wonderful ways into religions. For Physicians
prescribe medicines which serve to cure *diseases of the soul*,
as in the treatments of mania, and melancholy: moreover,
they offer medicines to gladden the mind, to
strengthen the heart, and thereby increase fortitude, to
sharpen the intellect, to strengthen memory, and similar
things. But diets, and the choice of foods and drinks, and
ablutions, and other observances concerning the body, in the sect of the
Pythagoreans and in the Heresy of the Manichaeans, and
in the Law of Mahomet, exceed all measure.
Also the ordinances of the Ceremonial Law, prohibiting
the *eating of Blood and Fat*, and distinguishing *clean
animals from unclean* (as far as the use of food is concerned),
are both numerous, and precise. Indeed, the Christian faith
itself (although free and serene from the cloud of Ceremonies)
nevertheless retains the use of fasts, abstinences,
and other things, which tend to the maceration of the body
                                                            and hu-

--- Page 265 ---
L I B E R IV.        243
and humiliation. They regard these as things not merely ritual, but also fruitful.
But the root of all such precepts, besides the ceremony itself and the exercise of obedience, consists in this matter of which we speak: Namely, that the soul sympathizes with the body. But if anyone, weaker in judgment, should think that these Impressions of the Body on the Soul either call into doubt the Immortality of the Soul, or detract from the Soul's Dominion over the Body; a light answer will suffice for a light doubt. Let him seek examples, either from an Infant in the Mother's Womb: who sympathizes with the Mother's Affections, and yet is excluded from the mother's body in due time: or from Monarchs, who, though powerful, are sometimes swayed by the impetuosity of servants, while their Royal Majesty remains intact.
      Now as to the reciprocal part, (concerning the *soul and its affections acting upon the body*) that also finds a place in medicine. For no physician who is even a little prudent fails to consider and treat the *accidents of the mind*, as a matter of the greatest importance for his cures, and one which greatly either aids or hinders all other remedies. But something else, which pertains to this, has been inquired into very sparingly, and not in proportion to the subtlety or utility of the matter; namely, to what extent (setting aside affections) the *imagination of the soul itself*, or a very fixed thought, and as it were exalted into a kind of *faith*, is capable of changing the body of the one imagining? For although it has a manifest power to harm, yet not from that

--- Page 266 ---
244    ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
it therefore follows that it is endowed with equal power to help. No more, by Hercules, than if someone concluded that because some air is found so pestilential that it suddenly kills, there ought also to be some air so salubrious that it suddenly restores a sick person. And this inquiry would certainly be of noble use; but (as Socrates says) it needs a *Delian Swimmer*, because it sinks into the deep. Again, among these *doctrines concerning the covenant, or agreements of the soul and body,* no other would have been more necessary than that *arrangement concerning the proper seats and dwellings which the individual faculties of the soul have in the body and its organs.* Those who have pursued this kind of *Science* are not lacking, but what is held by most is either controversial or lightly investigated; so that greater diligence and acumen are needed. For the opinion introduced by Plato, by which the intellect is placed in the brain as if in a citadel, *spiritedness* (which he rather unskillfully called anger, though it is more akin to swelling and pride) in the heart, and *concupiscence and sensuality* in the liver, is neither to be entirely despised nor eagerly accepted. Again, nor is the assignment of those intellectual faculties (*Imagination, Reason, Memory*) according to the ventricles of the brain free from error. And we have explained the *Doctrine concerning the undivided Nature of Man, and also concerning the Covenant of Mind and Body.*

                                        **CAP.**

--- Page 267 ---
LIBER. IV. 245

CAP. II.

The division of the doctrine concerning the human body into medicine;
and the voluptuary art. The division of medicine into three offices,
namely: the Preservation of Health, the Cure of
Diseases, and the Prolongation of Life. And that the
last part concerning the Prolongation of Life ought to be separated from
the other two.

**D**octrine concerning the human body receives the same
division as the goods of the body itself,
which it serves: the goods of the human body are four:
Health, form or beauty, strength, pleasure.
Therefore, there are as many Sciences: Medicine,
Cosmetics, Athletics, and the Voluptuary art, which
Tacitus calls "Erudite luxury."
Medicine is an art noble in the first place, and from the most
generous lineage, according to the Poets. For they
introduced Apollo as the primary God of Medicine;
to whom they gave a Son, Aesculapius, likewise a God,
and a Professor of Medicine: Indeed, since
the Sun in Natural things is the author and source of life, the
Physician is the preserver of the same, and as it were, another
spring. But a far more illustrious glory accrues to
Medicine from the works of the Savior, who was a Physician
both of the soul and of the body: And just as he constituted
the soul as the object of his heavenly doctrine, so he constituted
the body as, as it were, the proper object of his miracles.
For nowhere do we read of any miracle performed
by him concerning honors or money (except for the
single one by which tribute was rendered to Caesar),
but only concerning the human body, either to be preserved,
or to be sustained, or to be perfectly healed.
M Sub-

--- Page 268 ---
246          Oɴ ᴛʜᴇ Aᴅᴠᴀɴᴄᴇᴍᴇɴᴛ ᴏғ Lᴇᴀʀɴɪɴɢ
This subject of *Medicine* (the human body, namely)
of all things which Nature has created, is most
capable of remedy; but in turn that remedy
is most liable to error. For the same subtlety
and variety of the subject, as it offers great
faculty of healing, so also [it offers] great facility
for erring. Wherefore, just as this Art (especially
as it is now practiced) is among the principally
conjectural [arts]; so its investigation must be
placed among the extremely arduous and accurate [ones].
Nor therefore do we so foolishly err with Paracelsus
and the Alchemists, as to think that there are
found in the human body things which correspond
to individual Species of the Universe of Things
(*Stars, Minerals, & others*), as they fable, lightly
and clumsily translating that Emblem of the Ancients
(that man was a *Microcosm*, or Epitome of the whole
World) to this their own fiction. But nevertheless,
the matter comes to this, that (as we began to say)
there is not found among natural bodies any so
complexly composed as the *human*. For we see
that herbs and plants are nourished by earth and
water; animals by herbs and fruits: but man from
the flesh of the animals themselves (quadrupeds,
birds, fish), also from herbs, grains, fruits, various
juices and liquids, not without manifold commixture,
seasoning, and preparation of these bodies, before
they become food for man. Add to this that for
animals the mode of living is simpler, and the affections
which act upon the body are fewer, and almost to one
                                                                    [end]

--- Page 269 ---
LIBER IV. 247
operating in almost a single manner; whereas man, in places of habita-
tion, through exercises, affections, sleep and
waking, undergoes almost infinite turns of various changes.
So true is it that, among other things, the *mass of the human body* is most
highly agitated, and composed of very many parts.
But the *soul*, on the contrary, is the simplest of sub-
stances, as that poet not badly sang:
—— *And left pure,*
*Ethereal sense, and the fire of simple ether.*
Whence it is not at all surprising that the *Soul*, thus
situated, finds no rest, according to that ax-
iom, '*The motion of things outside their place is ra-
pid, peaceful in their place.*' But to return to the mat-
ter; this varied and subtle composition and structure of the *human body*
has made it to be like an elaborate and exquisite musical instrument,
which easily falls out of harmony. Wherefore among Poets, with the highest
reason, Music is joined with Medicine in Apollo;
because the Genius of both arts is almost similar;
and in this plainly consists the duty of the Physician,
that he knows how to so tension and pluck the Lyre of the human body,
so that a harmony is rendered that is neither discordant, nor unpleasant.
Consequently then, this inconstancy and variety of the subject
has rendered the art more conjectural: And since an art
is so conjectural, it has given wider scope not only to er-
ror, but also to imposture. Indeed almost all
other arts and sciences are judged by their
own virtue and function, not by success or outcome.
The advocate, the very faculty of acting and speaking.
                                   M 2                      cultas.

--- Page 270 ---
:248      Oɴ Tʜᴇ Aᴅᴠᴀɴᴄᴇᴍᴇɴᴛ Oғ Lᴇᴀʀɴɪɴɢ.
the faculty, not the outcome of the case, commends him; the pilot of a ship proves himself by his skill in holding the rudder, not by the fortune of the voyage. But the *Physician*; and perhaps the Politician, scarcely have any proper actions by which they might clearly display a Specimen of their Art and Virtue; but they chiefly receive Honor or Disgrace from the Outcome, by a judgment altogether most unjust.
   For how many people know, when a patient is dead or restored, or likewise when the Republic is standing or tottering, whether the matter is one of chance or of counsel? It happens therefore very often that the impostor carries off the palm, while virtue receives censure. Indeed, such is the weakness and credulity of men, that very often they prefer a Charlatan or a Sorceress to a learned Physician. Wherefore the Poets seem to have been clearly discerning and perspicacious, when they gave Circe as a Sister to Aesculapius, both born from the Sun; as is held in the verses, concerning Aesculapius, son of Phoebus,
   *He, the discoverer of such Medicine and Art,*
   *With a thunderbolt, thrust the son of Phoebus to the*
       *Stygian waves.*
And similarly concerning Circe, daughter of the Sun;
   *Where the rich daughter of the Sun, in inaccessible light,*
   *Burns fragrant cedar for nocturnal*
       *lights.*
For at all Times, by the fame and opinion of the common people, Sorceresses, and Old Women, and Impostors, have been in a certain way rivals of Physicians; and have contended with them almost concerning the celebrity of cures. From this, please tell me what follows? Namely, that Physicians thus with themselves, just as Solomon

--- Page 271 ---
LIBER IV. 249

Solomon in a more serious matter; *If there is one outcome for both the fool and me, what good does it do me that I applied myself more to wisdom?* Indeed, I am less angry with physicians if they very often devote themselves to some other study, which they love more than their own proper Art. For you will find among them Poets, Antiquarians, Critics, Rhetoricians, Politicians, Theologians, and more learned in these Arts than in their own profession. Nor does this happen, as I believe, because (as a certain Declaimer against the Sciences objects to physicians) they have objects confronting them so foul and sad that it is absolutely necessary for them to divert their minds to other things; (*For being human, they should think nothing human alien to them;*) But because of this very thing, which we are now discussing; namely, that they think it matters little to them, either for reputation or for profit, whether they achieve mediocrity in their art or greater perfection in it.

For the weariness of disease, the sweetness of life, the deceptiveness of hope, and the recommendation of friends, cause people to easily place trust in any kind of physician. But if anyone considers these things more attentively, they point rather to the fault of physicians than to an excuse for their fault. For they ought not to have abandoned hope, but rather to have exerted their strength. For if anyone chooses to awaken their observation, and gradually look around, even from obvious and familiar examples, they will easily discover how much power *subtlety and sharpness of intellect* obtains over the variety of things, whether of *Matter* or of *Form*. Nothing M 3 more

--- Page 272 ---
250          On the Advancement of Learning.
more varied than the faces and expressions of
men; Yet memory retains their infinite distinctions: Indeed, a painter, from a few samples of colors,
using the keenness of his eye, and the power of imagination, and the steadiness of his hand,
could imitate and describe with a brush the faces of all who are, who have been,
and even (if they were presented before him) who
will be. Nothing is more varied than the human voice; Yet we easily recognize its distinctions in individual persons:
Moreover, there are certain jesters and mimes who know how to imitate as many as they wish,
and portray them vividly. Nothing is more
varied than articulated sounds, namely words:
Yet a method has been devised for reducing them to the few letters of the Alphabet. And this is most true:
that perplexities and incomprehensibilities in the Sciences usually arise not from the fact that the human mind is less
subtle or capable, but rather from the fact that the Object is placed too remotely.
For just as a sense, placed far from the object, is greatly deceived, but when brought sufficiently
close, does not err much; so it is in the intellect.
But men are accustomed to look down upon nature, as if from a very high tower, and from afar,
and to be too much occupied with generalities; whereas if they would descend
and approach particulars, and inspect the things themselves more attentively and diligently, a more true and useful comprehension would result. Therefore,
the remedy for this difficulty is not only in this,
that they either sharpen or strengthen the organ itself, but at the same time that they approach the object more
closely. And therefore there is no doubt that if
                                                                    Medi-

--- Page 273 ---
**BOOK IV. 251**
Were physicians to set aside these generalities for a little while, they would wish to confront Nature and become masters of it, concerning which the Poet says:
   *And since diseases vary, we shall vary our arts;*
   *A thousand kinds of ill, a thousand kinds of healing there were.*
They ought to do this all the more, because the philosophies themselves, upon which physicians rely, whether Methodists or Chemists (for medicine not founded on philosophy is a weak thing), are in reality of little value. Wherefore if generalities that are too broad (even if they were true) have this fault, that they do not effectively guide people to action, certainly there is greater danger from those generalities which are inherently false: and, instead of leading, they mislead.

Medicine therefore (as we have observed) has hitherto been so constituted that it has been more for show than for substance: also more worked upon than expanded, since the labors expended on it have revolved in a circle rather than advanced. For I see very many things in it repeated by writers, and few additions made. We will divide it into three parts, which we will call its three functions. The first is *The Preservation of Health*, the second *The Cure of Diseases*, the third *The Prolongation of Life*. But this last, physicians do not seem to have recognized as a principal part of their art, but rather to have quite unskillfully mingled it with the other two. For they think that if diseases are repelled before they attack, and cured after they have invaded, the Prolongation of life will follow of its own accord.

--- Page 274 ---
252           OF THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
Although this is by no means doubtful, yet they perceive too little acutely that both of these pertain only to diseases, and only to that *prolongation of life* which is shortened and cut short by diseases. But to prolong the very thread of life, and to remove death, creeping on gradually through simple dissolution and senile atrophy, for a time, is a subject which no physician has treated with due dignity. Nor indeed should that scruple enter the minds of men, as if this matter, committed to fate and divine Providence, were now for the first time recalled by us into the office and function of art. For Providence undoubtedly governs all deaths whatsoever, whether from violence, or from diseases, or from the course of age, equally; yet it does not therefore exclude preventions and remedies. But art and human industry do not command nature and fate, but minister to them. But we will speak of this part a little later; having only said this in the meantime, lest anyone unskillfully confuse this third office of Medicine with the two former ones (with which it has almost always been dealt until now).

    As for the office of *preserving Health* (the first of the aforesaid offices of Medicine), many have written about it, though in other matters quite unskillfully, and, as we think, attributing too much to the choice of foods, and less than is proper to their quantity. Nay, even in quantity itself, like moral philosophers, they have praised moderation too much; whereas both customary fasts, and a liberal diet, to which one who has accustomed himself,
                                                              better

--- Page 275 ---
L I B E R IV. 253
better preserve health than those mediocrities,
which almost render nature sluggish, patient
neither of excess nor of want, when there shall be need.
Moreover, the kinds of exercises which are most
powerful in preserving health, no one among
physicians has well distinguished or noted,
although scarcely any inclination to disease is
found which cannot be corrected by some proper
excitation. For diseases of the kidneys, the game
of globes is suitable; for the lungs, archery; for the
stomach, walking and carriage, and for others, other things.
But since this part, *concerning the preservation
of health*, has been treated as a whole, it is not
our intention to pursue minor defects.
    As for *the Cure of Diseases*, that finally is
the part of *Medicine* in which the greatest labor
has been expended, though with rather meager
fruit. It contains, moreover, the *Doctrine* concerning
*Diseases* to which the human body is subject,
together with their *Causes, Symptoms*, and
*Remedies*. In this second office of *Medicine*, many
things are wanting: From these, we shall propose a few, but
the most notable, which we shall deem sufficient to enumerate,
without any law of order or method.
    First is, *the Intermission of that diligence of Hip-*
*pocrates*, very useful and accurate, whose custom
it was to compose a narrative of special cases
concerning the sick; relating what the nature of the
disease had been, what the medication, what the outcome.
And having now obtained for ourselves an example
of this matter, so proper and notable, namely in that man,
                                    M 5                                     who

--- Page 276 ---
254      On the Advancement of Learning.
who was regarded as the Father of Art, there will be no
need at all to seek some external example from
other arts; As from the Prudence of Jurists,
to whom nothing is more important than committing to
writing the more notable cases, and new decisions;
by which they may better arm and instruct themselves
for future Cases. Therefore, I see that this *Continuation
of Medical Narratives* is desired; especially digested
into one body with diligence and judgment. Which,
however, I do not understand ought to be made so
extensive as to include plainly Common things, and
those which occur daily; (For that would be something
infinite, and not to the point:) nor again so
narrow as to embrace only Wonders and Marvels
(which has been done by some). For many things
are new in the Mode of a thing, and its Circumstances,
which are not new in the Genus itself: But whoever
applies his mind to observation, to him also in things
which seem common, many things worthy of observation
will occur.
   Likewise, in *Anatomical Disquisitions* it usually
happens that what pertains to the human body in general
is noted most diligently, even to the point of curiosity,
and in the smallest details: But concerning the variety
found in different bodies, the diligence of Physicians
fails. Therefore, I assert that *Simple Anatomy* is treated
most clearly, but I determine that *Comparative Anatomy*
is desired. For men rightly investigate individual
Parts, and their *Consistencies, Figures, Positions*:
but the diverse figure and condition of those *Parts*
in different men is less
                                                                  obser-

--- Page 277 ---
            BOOK IV.           255
observe. And we believe the cause of this omission to be no other than that for the first inquiry, the inspection of one or another *Anatomy* may suffice; but for the latter (which is comparative, and admits of variation), it is necessary that attentive and keen observation of very many dissections be employed. The former is also a thing in which learned men, in their lectures and in the assembly of *Bystanders*, can boast: but the second is that which can only be acquired by silent and long-term experience. Meanwhile, it is by no means doubtful that the figure and structure of internal parts yield very little to the variety and lineaments of external members; and that hearts, or livers, or stomachs, are as dissimilar in humans as either foreheads, or noses, or ears. And in these very differences of internal parts, are found more often *

--- Page 278 ---
256          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
In dissections, as if they were refuse and things to be disdained,
are almost always passed over, when nevertheless it is especially
necessary to note what kind and how manifold are the species
of different humors (not attributing too much in this matter
to their accepted divisions) which are sometimes found in the
human body, and in what regions and receptacles each of them
is most accustomed to fix its seats and nests; and with what
benefit or harm; and similar things to these. Likewise, the
traces and impressions of diseases, and the lesions and devastations
of the internal parts by them, are to be noted with diligence
in diverse dissections; Namely, Abscesses, Ulcers, Solutions of
Continuity, Putrefactions, Erosions, Consumptions, furthermore
Contractions, Extensions, Convulsions, Luxations, Displacements,
Obstructions, Repletions, Tumors, together with all Preter-Natural
Matters which are found in the human body, (such as Calculi,
Carnosities, Tubercles, Worms, and suchlike:) All these things
(I say), and similar things to these, by means of that comparative
anatomy which we have mentioned, and the experiments of many
physicians collected into one, ought to be inquired into and
compiled with great care. But this variety of occurrences in
dissections is either treated perfunctorily or passed over in silence.

  But concerning that other defect regarding anatomy (namely,
that it has not been accustomed to be done in living bodies),
what need is there to say? For this thing is hateful and barbarous,
and rightly condemned by Celsus.

--- Page 279 ---
L I B E R IV. 257
Innate. Yet it is no less true (as was noted by the Ancients) that many pores and passages, and perfusions, which are of the more subtle kind, do not appear in anatomical dissections; since these are closed and hidden in cadavers; whereas in living beings they are dilated, and can be conspicuous. Therefore, so that both utility and humanity may be consulted at the same time, the *Anatomy of the Living* is not to be entirely rejected, nor to be relegated to the fortuitous inspections of surgeons (as Celsus did): since this very thing can be well accomplished through the dissection of living brutes, which, notwithstanding the dissimilarity of their parts to human ones, can satisfy this inquiry, with judgment applied.

Likewise, in their inquiry concerning *Diseases*, they find many *Diseases* which they declare *Incurable*, some right from the beginning of the diseases, others after some period. So much so that the Proscriptions of L. Sulla and the Triumvirs were as nothing, compared to the proscriptions of physicians, by which so many men are condemned to death by most unjust edicts; yet many of whom escape with less difficulty than those of old during the Roman proscriptions. Therefore, I shall not hesitate to place among the *Desiderata* some work concerning the *Cures of Diseases* which are held to be *Incurable*; so that some excellent and magnanimous physicians may be called forth and stirred up, who may apply themselves to this work, as much as the nature of things allows; since this very act, of *declaring these diseases incurable*, [is] neglect and carelessness as if by law

--- Page 280 ---
258      On the Advancement of Learning.
...as if by law it should sanction neglect and carelessness, and exempt ignorance from disgrace.
   Likewise, to dwell a little further: I also plainly deem it to pertain to the duty of a Physician, not only to *restore Health*: but also to *mitigate the pains and torments of Diseases*: Nor this itself only, when that mitigation of Pain, as a dangerous Symptom, *makes for and conduces to convalescence*; but indeed when all hope of health is utterly abandoned, *it may only provide a more gentle and peaceful departure from life*. For truly, no small part of happiness is (which Augustus Caesar was accustomed to pray for so greatly for himself) that *Euthanasia*; Which was also observed in the death of Antoninus Pius, when he seemed not so much to die, as to be taken by a sweet and deep sleep. It is also written concerning Epicurus, that he procured this very thing for himself: for when his disease was considered desperate, his stomach and senses, by a larger draught and gulping down of pure wine

--- Page 281 ---
L I B E R IV. 259
cit) we call it, and we place it among the *Desiderata*.
Likewise, in the *Cures of Diseases*, I find that this is generally *lacking*: That the physicians of this age, although they do not badly pursue the *general intentions of Cures*, yet particular Medicines, which pertain to the cures of individual diseases by a certain property, they either do not know well, or do not scrupulously observe. For physicians have destroyed and removed the fruit of traditions and proven experience by their authoritative prescriptions; by adding, and subtracting, and changing about Medicines, as it pleased them; and almost in the manner of apothecaries substituting *Quid pro Quo* (something for something else); so proudly commanding Medicine, that Medicine no longer commands the Disease. For, with Theriaca, and Mithridaticum, and perhaps Diascordium, and Confection of Alkermes, and a few other Medicines removed, they bind themselves scrupulously and strictly to almost no certain remedies. For those Medicines which are available for sale in the shops are rather ready for general intentions, than suited and proper for particular cures; since they specifically do not greatly regard any disease, but generally pertain to opening obstructions, strengthening digestions, altering distempers. And hence it especially happens that Empirics and Old Women often operate more successfully in curing diseases than learned physicians, because the confection and composi-

--- Page 282 ---
260 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
composition faithfully and scrupulously retain. Indeed, I remember a certain physician among us in England, celebrated in practice, nearly a Jew in religion, and like an Arab in book-learning, who used to say, "Your European physicians are indeed learned men, but they do not know particular cures for diseases." Moreover, he used to jest, rather improperly, saying, "Our physicians are like bishops, having the keys of binding and loosing, and nothing more." But to speak seriously, as is the case; we deem it of great importance that some physicians, more distinguished both in learning and in practice, should compile some work concerning proven and experimental medicines for particular diseases. For as to the idea that someone, relying on a plausible argument, should think it proper for a learned physician (taking into account the constitution of the sick, age, season of the year, customs, and such like) rather to adapt medicines extemporaneously, than to insist on certain prescribed remedies;

--- Page 283 ---
L I B E R IV. 261
...still less in the very body of Medicines; in which
nothing should be innovated, without evident necessity.
Therefore, we determine that this part, which treats of *Authentic
& Positive* Medicines, is wanting. But it is a matter
which ought not to be attempted without keen and severe judgment,
and as it were in a Synod of selected Physicians.
Likewise, among the preparations of Medicines,
it is surprising (especially since *Medicines* from Min-
erals have been so much advanced and celebrated
by the Chemists; and since such Medicines are more safely
applied externally, than taken internally) that
no one has yet been found who has endeavored by art to imitate *Natural
hot springs & Medicinal fountains*: although it is acknowledged
that those hot springs and fountains derive their virtues from the veins of Min-
erals, through which they pass: and moreover, as a clear proof
of this, human industry well knows how to discern and dis-
tinguish by certain Separations, from what
kind of Minerals such waters are imbued,
as whether from sulphur, vitriol, steel, [61]
or something similar. If this natural tincture
of waters could be reduced to artificial compositions,
it would be in man's power both to produce more kinds of them
(as use demands), and to regulate their temperament at will.
Therefore, we deem this part, concerning the *Imitation of Na-
ture in Artificial baths* (a matter without doubt
both useful, and readily available), to be wanting.
Ne

--- Page 284 ---
**262 On the Advancement of Learning**
But lest we pursue individual points more scrupulously than is fitting either for our purpose or for the nature of this Treatise, we will close this part with the enumeration of another certain defect, which seems to us of the greatest importance: Namely, that the *method of healing* which has prevailed is *far too compendious* for it to be able to achieve anything significant or difficult. For in our judgment, it would be an opinion more flattering than true, if anyone were to imagine that some medicine could be made so potent or efficacious that its simple use would suffice for some greater cure. Truly wonderful would be a Discourse which, pronounced, or even often repeated, could correct or remove some fault, deeply ingrained or inveterate in the mind. Far from it indeed. But what are exceptionally powerful and effective in Nature are order, sustained application, sequence, and skillful alternation. Which, although they require a somewhat greater judgment in prescribing and greater constancy in obeying, yet they abundantly compensate for the requirements by the magnitude of their effects. And although from the daily work of physicians, which they perform for the sick by visiting, attending, and prescribing, someone might think that they diligently pursue the cure and adhere to a certain path in it: Yet if anyone should look more keenly into those things which physicians are accustomed to prescribe and administer, he will find most things full of vacillation and inconsistency, and which are devised on the spur of the moment and come into their minds, without any certain or foreseen path of Cure. But they ought also
                                                                        even

--- Page 285 ---
L I B E R IV. 263
even from the beginning, after the disease has been well observed and understood, to plan an ordered series of treatment, and not to depart from it without grave cause. And let Physicians know for certain that perhaps three or four Medicines can (for example) be rightly prescribed for curing some grave disease, which, taken in due order and at due intervals, may effect a cure: of which each one, if taken by itself only, or if the order were inverted, or the interval not observed, would be altogether harmful. Nor yet do we wish this, that every scrupulous and superstitious method of healing be held in esteem as the best (no more than every *narrow way is the way to Heaven*): but that the way be as straight, as it is narrow and difficult. This part, moreover, *which we shall call the medicinal thread, we posit as lacking.* And these are those things which we find wanting in the *Doctrine of Medicine concerning the Cure of Diseases*: except that one thing remains, which is worth more than all those things. *There is wanting, namely, a true and active natural Philosophy, upon which the Science of Medicine may be built. But that is not for this Treatise.*

The third part of *Medicine*, we have posited as that concerning the *Prolongation of life*, which is new, and *is wanting*: And it is the noblest of all. For if such a thing can be found, Medicine will not only be engaged in the *sordidness of Cures*; nor will Physicians themselves be honored only because of *Necessity*, but certainly because of a gift to mortals, from earthly things, as if the greatest, of which they will be able

--- Page 286 ---
264      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCES.
...be, according to God, Dispensers, Ministers. For although the World may be like a Desert to a Christian man striving towards the promised land; nevertheless, for those journeying in that very Desert, that their shoes and clothes (namely our body, which is in the place of a covering for the soul) be less worn out, is to be considered a certain Gift of divine Grace. Concerning this matter, because it is among the best, and we have placed it among the *Desiderata*, according to our custom, we will give both admonitions, and indications, and Precepts.
      Firstly, we *admonish*, that among writers concerning this Subject, no one has found anything great, let alone anything sound. Aristotle certainly published a very small Commentary on this, in which there is something acute: which he wants to be everything, as is his custom. But recent authors have written so carelessly and superstitiously about this, that the Subject itself, because of their vanity, has begun to be considered as vain and senseless.
      Secondly, we *admonish*, that the very intentions of physicians which relate to this, are things of no value, and rather lead men's thoughts away from the matter, than direct them towards it. For they discourse that death consists in the lack of heat and moisture:
Therefore, natural heat ought to be strengthened,
and radical moisture ought to be cherished: Just as if this matter could be accomplished with broths, or with lettuces and mallows, or with starch, or with jujubes, or again with spices, or with generous wine, or even with spirit of wine, and chemical oils. All of which are rather harmful than beneficial.
      Thirdly, we *admonish*, that men cease to tri-
                                                                fle,

--- Page 287 ---
LIBER IV. 265

...and not be so credulous as to believe that that great work, which is Nature, to delay and reverse its course, can be brought to an end by some morning draught, or the use of some precious medicine: not by potable gold, not by essences of pearls, and similar trifles: but that they should hold for certain that *Prolongation of Life* is an arduous matter, and one which consists of several remedies, and their suitable connection with each other. For no one ought to be so stupid <u>as to believe that what has never yet been done, can now be done, unless by methods also</u> [*Handwritten marginal note:* not] <u>never attempted.</u>

*Fourthly, we warn* that men should duly observe and distinguish concerning those things which can contribute to a *healthy life*, and those which can contribute to a *long life*. For there are some things which are beneficial for the alacrity of the spirits, and the strength of functions, and for warding off diseases: yet these detract from the sum of life, and accelerate senile atrophy without diseases: And there are others which help towards the Prolongation of life, and the further postponement of senile atrophy: but these are not used without risk to health; So much so that those who use them for the Prolongation of life, ought at the same time to counteract the inconveniences which might otherwise arise from their use. And *thus far we have given warnings.*

As for *Indications*; such is the form (which we measure with the Mind) of this matter. Things are preserved and endure in two ways: *Either in Identity: Or by Reparation. In their Identity,*

--- Page 288 ---
266 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
its own, as a fly or ant in amber: A Flower, or Apple, or Wood in Snowy Conservatories: A Corpse among balms. By Repair, as in Flame and in Mechanics. For one working towards the Prolongation of Life, both kinds must be used (separated, they can do less), and the human body must be preserved, just as Inanimate things are preserved: And again, just as Flame is preserved; And finally, to some extent, as Mechanical things are preserved. Therefore there are three intentions for prolonging life: [marginal ink smudge] Retardation of Consumption: Integrity of Repair, & Renovation of that which has begun to grow old. Consumption occurs from two depredations: Depredation of the innate spirit; & depredation of the ambient Air. The prohibition of both is twofold: Either if those Agents become less Predatory, or if the Patients (namely, the Juices of the body) are rendered less Depredable. The spirit becomes less Predatory, if

--- Page 289 ---
L I B E R IV. 267
*For hardy constitutions, as in a harsh diet, a life in the cold: through robust exer-*
*cises: certain mineral baths. For moist constitutions, as in the use of mild things, & ab-*
*stinence from salty & acidic things, & most of all*
*in such a mixture of drink, which consists of very thin*
*& subtle parts, yet without any acri-*
*mony or acidity. Repair is made through nourish-*
*ment: But nourishment is promoted in four*
*ways: By the concoction of the viscera for the extrusion*
*of nourishment, as in strengthening the principal*
*viscera: By the excitation of the exterior parts*
*for the attraction of nourishment, as in exercises*
*& proper rubbings, and certain unctions*
*& appropriate baths: By the prepara-*
*tion of the nourishment itself, so that it may more easily insinuate itself, &*
*may in some measure anticipate the digestions themselves, as in*
*various & artful ways of seasoning food, mixing drink,*
*fermenting bread, & combining the virtues of these three*
*into one: By the strengthening*
*of the very last act of assimilation, as in timely sleep,*
*& certain external applications. Renewal of that which has begun to age,*
*is done in two ways: Either by the softening*
*of the habit of the body itself, as in the use of emollients*
*from baths, plasters, & unctions:*
*which are such as to impress (impart), not extract:*
*Or by the purging of old humor, & the substi-*
*tution of new humor, as in timely & repeated*
*purgings, blood-lettings, &*
*attenuating diets, & which restore the flower of the body.*
*And concerning the Indications, so much for now.*
*Precepts, although very many from these very Indications*
                                                                      ma

--- Page 290 ---
268         ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
many could be deduced; nevertheless, it seemed good to subjoin three, as it were, principal ones. We *prescribe* first, that the Prolongation of life should be expected rather from established Diets, than from any familiar regimen of living; or even from the excellence of particular medicines. For, those things which possess such great power as to be able to reverse nature; are generally stronger and more potent for altering, than that they could be compounded simultaneously in some Medicine, much less interspersed in familiar diet. It remains therefore that they should be applied serially, and regularly, and at certain times, and recurring at certain intervals.
    Secondly, we *prescribe*, that *Prolongation of Life* should be expected rather from operation on the Spirits, and from the Softening of the parts, than from modes of alimentation. For, since the human Body, and its Structure (external things being omitted) suffers from three things; namely, Spirits; Parts; and Aliments; the Way of prolongation of life through modes of alimentation is long; and through many windings and circuits: But the ways through operations upon the Spirits, and upon the parts, are much shorter, and by which the desired end is reached more quickly; because the Spirits suffer suddenly, both from vapors, and from affections, which can enter them by these methods: likewise the parts, by Baths, or Ointments, or Plasters, which also make sudden impressions.
    Thirdly, we *prescribe*, that the Softening of the parts externally, ought to be done by *Consubstantials, Imprinting [agents], and Occluding [agents]. Consub-*
                                                                *stantials*

--- Page 291 ---
L I B E R IV. 269

ſtantialia, Imprimientia, & Occludentia. Con-
ſubſtantialia enim benevolo partium amplexu
libenter excipiuntur, & proprie malaciſſant.
Imprimientia autem, & virtutem Malaciſſantium,
tanquam vehicula, facilius & altius deducunt,
atque ipſa partes nonnihil expandunt. Occlu-
dentia autem, virtutem utrorumque retinent,
& pauliſper figunt, & perſpirationem, quæ eſt
res Malaciſſationi oppoſita, (quia humidum
emittit,) cohibent. Itaque per hæc tria (ſed po-
tius ordine diſpoſita, & ſuccedentia, quam
commixta) res abſolvitur. Interim in hac parte
monemus; non eam eſſe intentionem Malaciſ-
fationis, ut nutriat partes per exterius; ſed tan-
tum ut eas reddat magis idoneas ad nutrien-
dum. Quicquid enim magis aridum eſt, minus
eſt activum ad aſſimilandum. Atque de Prolon-
gatione *Vitæ*, quæ eſt pars tertia *Medicinæ*, novi-
ter aſcripta, hæc dicta ſint.

Veniamus ad *Coſmeticam*, quæ certe partes
habet civiles, partes rurſus effœminatas. Cor-
poris enim munditia, & decor honeſtus, recte
exiſtimatur promanare à modeſtia quadam
morum, & à reverentia; inprimis erga Deum,
cujus creaturæ ſumus; tum erga ſocietatem, in
qua degimus; tum etiam erga noſmet ipſos,
quos non minus, imo magis, quam alios re-
vereri debemus. Verum adulterina illa decora-
tio, quæ fucos & pigmenta adhibet, digna
certe eſt illis defectibus, qui eam ſemper comi-
tantur, cum non ſit, aut ad fallendum ſatis in-
genioſa, aut ad utendum ſatis commoda, aut

N                                  ad

BOOK IV. 269

stantials, Imprinting, and Occluding substances. For the Consubstantials are readily received by the kindly embrace of the parts, and properly soften them. But the Imprinting substances, as vehicles, more easily and deeply convey the power of the Softeners, and they themselves expand the parts somewhat. But the Occluding substances retain the power of both, and fix it for a little while, and restrain perspiration, which is contrary to Softening (because it emits moisture). Therefore, by these three (but rather arranged in order and succeeding one another, than mixed together) the matter is accomplished. Meanwhile, in this part, we warn that it is not the intention of Softening to nourish the parts externally, but only to render them more suitable for nourishment. For whatever is drier is less active in assimilating. And concerning the Prolongation of *Life*, which is the third part of *Medicine*, newly added, let these things have been said.

Let us come to *Cosmetics*, which certainly has civil aspects, and again, effeminate aspects. For the cleanliness of the body and honest decorum are rightly considered to proceed from a certain modesty of manners and from reverence; primarily towards God, whose creatures we are; then towards society, in which we live; then also towards ourselves, whom we ought to revere no less, indeed more, than others. But that adulterated decoration, which employs dyes and pigments, is certainly worthy of those defects which always accompany it, since it is neither ingenious enough to deceive, nor convenient enough to use, nor

N                                  to

--- Page 292 ---
270      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
sufficiently safe and harmless for health. But we wonder how this depraved custom of
applying cosmetics has for so long escaped the censorious laws, both Ecclesiastical and
Civil, which otherwise were very severe concerning luxury in clothes, or
effeminate hair styles. We certainly read about
Jezebel, that she smeared her face with pigments;
but concerning Esther and Judith, nothing of the sort is reported.

      Let us proceed to Athletics. We understand it in a somewhat broader sense than it is accustomed to be understood.
For to this we assign whatever concerns acquiring any kind of Ability (which the human body is capable of); whether it be of Agility,
or of Endurance. Of these, Agility has two parts, Strength and Speed: And Endurance likewise two, either patience of Natural
Needs, or Fortitude in Torments. Of all these we very often see
remarkable examples in the practice of tightrope walkers,

--- Page 293 ---
            BOOK IV.               271
it happens that such masteries of Nature are achieved either solely from a peculiar disposition of certain individuals (which cannot be taught) or from long-standing habit, from childhood years (which is more often commanded than taught). And although this may not be entirely true, yet what purpose does it serve to note the deficiencies of such things? For the Olympic contests have long since ceased; moreover, in such matters, mediocrity suffices for practical use; excellence, however, almost always serves a certain mercenary display.
    Finally, we come to the _pleasurable arts_. These are divided according to the senses themselves: the eyes are delighted especially by _Painting_, along with countless other arts which pertain to magnificence, concerning buildings, gardens, clothes, vessels, cups, gems, and similar things. The ears are soothed by _Music_, which, with such a variety of voices, wind, strings, and apparatus, inst-

--- Page 294 ---
...*generation*, concerning the fetus and *gestation* in the womb, concerning *growth*, concerning *puberty*, concerning *old age*, concerning *fattening*, and similar things, we receive into the *Body of Medicine*; although they do not properly pertain to those three offices; but because the very body of man is in all things the *Subject of Medicine*. But the *motion of the will*...

--- Page 295 ---
**BOOK IV. 273**
voluntary motion, and sensation, we refer to the Doctrine of the Soul, since the parts of the Soul are more powerful in these two. And thus we conclude the Doctrine which is concerned with the body of man, which is merely a tabernacle for the Soul.

**CAP. III.**

*Division of Human Philosophy concerning the soul, into the Doctrine of the breath; and the doctrine of the sensible or produced soul. Second division of the same Philosophy into the Doctrine of the substance and faculties of the soul, and the doctrine of the use and objects of the faculties. Two appendices to the doctrine of the faculties of the soul; The Doctrine of natural divination, and the doctrine of fascination. Distribution of the faculties of the sensible soul into motion and sensation.*

[Large initial V]Let us come to the *doctrine of the human soul*; from whose treasures all other doctrines are drawn. It has two parts; One treats of the *rational soul*, which is Divine; The other of the *irrational* [soul], which is common with Brutes. We noted a little earlier (where we spoke of *forms*) those two different emanations of *souls*, which present themselves to be observed in the first creation of both; Namely, that one had its origin from the *breath of God*, the other from the *wombs of the Elements*. For concerning the primitive generation of the *rational soul*, thus says Scripture, "*He formed man from the dust of the earth, and breathed into his face the breath of life*." But the generation of the *Irrational soul*, or of Brutes, was made by those words, "*Let the water bring forth, Let the earth bring*
                                  N 3                                 *forth*."

--- Page 296 ---
...let the earth bring forth. But this *soul* (such as is in man) is only an organ to the *rational soul*, and it too has its origin, just as in *Brutes*, from the dust of the earth: For it was not said, "He formed the body of man from the dust of the earth," but "He formed man"; that is, the whole man, except for the *breath*. Wherefore we shall call the first part of the *general doctrine* concerning the *human soul*, the *doctrine concerning the breath*; and the second, the *doctrine concerning the sensible or produced soul*. Nor yet, since we have hitherto treated *Philosophy* alone (for we have placed *Sacred Theology* at the end of the work), would we borrow this division from *Theology*, unless it also agreed with the principles of *Philosophy*. For there are very many and very great excellences of the *human soul* above the *souls of Brutes*, manifest even to those philosophizing according to sense. But wherever a *Symbol of so many and so great Excellences* is found, there a *specific difference* ought always to be rightly established. Therefore, we are not too pleased with that confused and indiscriminate treatment by philosophers concerning the *functions of the soul*; as if the *human soul* were distinguished from the *soul of Brutes* by degree rather than by species: no differently than the *Sun* among the *Stars*, or *Gold* among the *Metals*.

Another division of the *general doctrine* concerning the *human soul* must also be subjoined, before we speak more fully of its species. For what we shall say later concerning the species, both...

--- Page 297 ---
L I B E R IV. 275

...both partitions simultaneously, both that one which we just now set forth, and this one which we will now propose. Therefore, let the second partition be into the doctrine concerning the substance and faculties of the soul, and the doctrine concerning the use and objects of the faculties.

Therefore, these twin partitions having been set forth, let us proceed to the species. The doctrine concerning the breath, and likewise concerning the substance of the rational soul, embraces those inquiries concerning its Nature; Whether it is native or adventitious: separable or inseparable: mortal or immortal: to what extent bound by the laws of matter, to what extent not at all: and similar things.

But things of this kind, although even in Philosophy they might undergo a more diligent and profound inquiry than is currently held, nevertheless, in the end, we deem it more proper that they be transmitted to Religion to be determined and defined: For otherwise, they will be entirely exposed to not a few errors and illusions of the senses. For, since the Substance of the soul, in its creation, was not extracted or deduced from the mass of Heaven and earth, but immediately inspired by God; and since the laws of Heaven and earth are the proper subjects of Philosophy; how can knowledge concerning the substance of the rational soul be sought and obtained from philosophy? Rather, let it be drawn from the same Divine inspiration from which the substance of the soul first emanated.

But the doctrine concerning the sensible, or produced, soul, even as far as its substance is concerned, is truly inquired into: But that inquiry seems to us, as it were, to be wanting

N 4

--- Page 298 ---
276      On the Advancement of Learning.
wanting. For what do *the doctrine of the substance of the soul,* *the ultimate act, and the form of the body,* and such *logical trifles* contribute? For *the sensible soul, or that of brutes,* is plainly to be considered a corporeal substance, attenuated by heat, and rendered invisible; an *aura* (I say) composed of a fiery and airy nature, endowed with the softness of air for receiving impressions, and with the vigor of fire for vibrating into action; nourished partly by oily, partly by watery substances; clothed by the body, and in perfect animals located chiefly in the head; running through the nerves, and refreshed and repaired by the spiritual blood of the arteries. just as *Bernardinus Telesius,* and his disciple *Augustinus Donius,* have asserted in some part, not entirely uselessly. Therefore, let a more diligent inquiry be made concerning this *doctrine*: all the more so, because this matter, not well understood, has given rise to superstitious and plainly contaminated opinions, and those most cruelly trampling upon the dignity of the human soul, concerning *Metempsychosis, and the purifications of souls through periods of years,* and finally concerning the too close *kinship of the human soul with the souls of brutes in all respects.* Now this *soul in brutes is the principal soul,* of which the body of brutes is the organ; but in man, it is only an organ, and can itself be designated rather by the appellation of *rational soul, and spirit,* than soul. And so much for *the substance of the soul.*
      But *the faculties of the soul* are very well known; *Intellect, Reason, Imagination, Memory, Appetite,*

--- Page 299 ---
LIBER IV. 277
*Appetite, Will*, finally all those [matters] with which
the Sciences of Logic and Ethics are concerned:
But in the *doctrine of the soul*, their origins ought to be
treated, and that physically, inasmuch as they are innate to the soul,
and adhere [to it]: only their *use*,
and *Objects*, are assigned to those other arts. And
in this part nothing excellent (as it seems to us)
has yet been found; although we would hardly say
that it is *lacking*. This part concerning the *faculties of the soul* also has two appendices,
which themselves, as they are treated, have presented
us with smoke rather than any bright flame
of truth: One of these is the
*doctrine of natural divination*; The other is the *doctrine of*
*fascination*.
     *Divination* has been divided by the Ancients, and not badly, into
two parts; *Artificial*, and
*Natural*. *Artificial* collects prediction by reasoning, from the indication
of signs. *Natural*,
predicts from the soul's own internal premonition, without
the aid of signs. *Artificial*
is twofold: One argues from *causes*; The other
from *experiments* only, with a certain blind authority.
The latter, for the most part, is superstitious.
Such were the disciplines of the Pagans,
concerning the *inspection of entrails, the flight of birds*, and
similar things. Even the more solemn *Astrology* of the Chaldeans
is not much better. But *artificial Divination*,
both kinds, is scattered among different Sciences.
The *Astrologer* has his predictions from the position of the
stars. The *Physician* also has his; concerning impending death;
concerning recovery; concerning symptoms—
                                   N 5                         mati-

--- Page 300 ---
278          Dᴇ Aᴜɢᴍ. Sᴄɪᴇɴᴛ.
symptoms of diseases about to come; from urines,
pulses, the appearance of the sick, and similar things. The
*Politician* also has his own; *O city for sale, and soon*
*to perish, if it finds a buyer!* The truth of which
Prophecy did not long delay; fulfilled first
in Sulla, afterwards in Caesar. Therefore, predictions
of this kind are not of the present Institution,
but ought to be referred to their proper arts.
But *Natural Divination*, having its origin, namely,
from the internal power of the soul, that finally is what is now
being discussed. This is twofold; *One is native*: the other through
*influx*. *Native* (divination) rests on this foundation of
supposition: That the soul, drawn back into itself, and
gathered, and not diffused into the organs of the body, has,
from the proper power of its essence, some pre-knowledge
of future things: That indeed is best observed
in dreams, ecstasies, the confines of death; more
rarely while awake, or when the body is healthy
and strong. Indeed, such a state of mind
is almost always brought about, or aided by abstinences,
and by those things which most withdraw the soul from
performing the functions of the body, so that its own
nature may rejoice without external impediments.
But *Divination* through *influx*,
rests on this other foundation of supposition;
That the soul, like a mirror, receives a certain
secondary illumination, from the Prescience
of God and Spirits; To which also the same
state and regimen of the body contributes, as to the former.
For the same withdrawal of the soul causes that it both
uses its own nature more intensely, and is more susceptible
to Divine Influxes: Except that in *Divinations*

--- Page 301 ---
L I B E R IV. 279
...except that in *Divinations* by *Influx* the soul is seized by a certain fervor, and as it were, an impatience of a present Deity (which among the Ancients was called by the name of *Sacred Fury*); but in *Native Divination*, it is rather closer to quiet and rest.

   But *Fascination* is an intensive power and act of imagination upon the body of another: (for we have briefly touched upon the power of imagination over the imaginer's own body above.) In this kind, the school of Paracelsus, and the followers of spurious *natural Magic*, were so immoderate that they almost equated the impulse and apprehension of imagination with *faith that works miracles*. Others, approaching closer to the likeness of *truth*; when they more acutely observed the hidden energies and impressions of things, the irradiations of the senses, the transmissions of contagions from body to body, the conveyances of magnetic virtues; came to the opinion that much more from Spirit to Spirit (since Spirit is above all things, and strenuous in acting, and tender and soft in suffering) impressions, and conveyances, and communications could occur. Hence opinions became widespread, as it were popular, concerning a superior Genius, concerning certain unlucky and ominous people, concerning the darts of love and envy, and others similar to these. And to this is joined the inquiry, *how Imagination can be intensified and strengthened?* For if strong imagination is of such great powers, it would be worthwhile to know by what means
                               N 6                      dis

--- Page 302 ---
280          On the Augmentation of Sciences.
by what means can it be exalted and made greater than itself? And here, obliquely, and no less dangerously, a certain palliation and defense for a very large part of *Ceremonial Magic* insinuates itself. For a plausible pretext would be that ceremonies, characters, incantations, gesticulations, amulets, and similar things do not derive their power from any tacit or Sacramental contract with evil Spirits; but pertain only to this, that the Imagination of him who uses them may be strengthened and exalted: just as also in Religion, the use of images has prevailed for fixing the minds of men in the contemplation of things, and for exciting the devotion of those praying.

Nevertheless, my opinion is this: Even if it be granted that the power of imagination is indeed potent, and moreover that Ceremonies intensify and strengthen that power; supposing finally that Ceremonies are employed for this intention sincerely, and as a Physical remedy, without any or the slightest thought of inviting the aid of Spirits through them: they ought nevertheless to be held as illicit, because they are repugnant to and kick against that Divine sentence pronounced against man because of Sin; *In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat thy bread*. Inasmuch as Magic of that kind proposes to obtain those excellent fruits, for which God has appointed Labor as the price, by a few, and those easy, and least laborious observances.

There remain two *Doctrines* which pertain to the *faculties of the lower, or sensitive, soul*; princi-
pally

--- Page 303 ---
L I B E R IV. 281
especially concern, inasmuch as they communicate most with bodily organs. One is concerning *voluntary motion*: The other is concerning *sense and the sensible*. In the former of these, though otherwise investigated rather meagerly, almost one entire part is missing. For concerning the function and convenient structure of nerves and muscles, and of other things which are required for this motion; and what part of the body rests, while another is moved; then that the imagination is the director and, as it were, charioteer of this motion; so much so that, if the image towards which the motion is directed is dismissed, the motion itself is immediately intercepted and stopped (as when we walk, if another sharp and fixed thought arises, we immediately stop); and some other not bad subtleties, have long since come into observation and inquiry. But how the compressions, and dilatations, and agitations of the Spirit (which is undoubtedly the source of motion) bends, excites, or impels the corporeal and gross mass of the parts, has not yet been diligently inquired into and treated. Nor is it strange, since the sensitive soul itself has hitherto been regarded rather as a kind of entelechy and function, than as a substance. But when it shall now be known that it is a corporeal and material substance, it is also necessary that it be inquired by what efforts such a tiny and tender breath can put such gross and hard bodies into *motion*. Therefore, concerning this part, since it is *lacking*, let an inquiry be made.
But concerning sense and the sensible, a far more abundant and diligent inquiry has been applied, both in Treatises

--- Page 304 ---
282          Oɴ ᴛʜᴇ Aᴜɢᴍ. ᴏғ Sᴄɪᴇɴᴄᴇs.
treatises concerning general matters, rather than in special
arts, such as *Perspective*, *Music*, which
truly contribute nothing to the purpose: since it is not permissible
to set those down as *things desired*. There are,
however, two noble and distinguished parts which we determine
to be lacking in this doctrine; One concerning the
*difference between perception and sense*: The other concerning the *form
of light.*
      And the philosophers ought to have prefixed a well-elucidated
difference between *perception and sense* to their
treatises on *sense and sensible*, as a most fundamental matter. For
we see that a manifest power of *perceiving* is inherent in almost
all natural bodies: also a certain choice of embracing what is friendly,
and fleeing what is hostile and alien. Nor do we speak only of more
subtle *perceptions*, as when a Magnet attracts iron; a Flame leaps to
naphtha; a Bubble, when approximated to another bubble,
coalesces; Radiation disperses from a white object; an animal
body assimilates useful things, excretes useless ones; a part of a
Sponge (even when raised above water) attracts water, expels air;
And of this kind. For what use is it to enumerate such things?
Indeed, no body, when brought near to another, changes it, or is
changed by it, unless a reciprocal *perception* precedes the operation.
A body *perceives* the passages by which it insinuates itself: It *perceives*
the impulse of another body, to which it yields: It *perceives* the
removal of another body, by which it was held, when it withdraws:
It *perceives* the tearing apart of its continuous self, which it resists
for a time: Everywhere, finally

--- Page 305 ---
LIBER IV. 283
everywhere, finally, there is *Perception*. Air, however, hot and cold
perceives so acutely, that its *Perception* is
far more subtle than human touch; which, never-
theless, is held as the standard for hot and cold. There-
fore, a twofold fault is found concerning this *doctrine*
of men: One, that they have for the most part left it untouched and
unhandled (though it is a most noble subject);
The other, that those who by chance applied their mind to this
contemplation, advanced further than is proper, and
attributed *Sense* to all bodies: so that it is almost a sacrilege
to tear a branch from a tree, lest perchance it
groan like Polydorus. But they ought to have explored
*the difference between Perception and Sense*, not only in
the comparison of sensible things to insensible things,
according to the entire body (such as
plants and animals), but also to observe in the
sensible body itself, what is the cause,
why so many actions are carried out, yet without
any *Sense*? Why are foods digested,
ejected; Humors and Juices carried
upwards, downwards; The Heart and Pulse vibrate;
The Viscera produce their respective works, like workshops;
And yet all these, and many others, occur
without *Sense*? But men have not seen acutely enough
what the action of *Sense* is, and
what kind of body, what delay, what redu-
plication of impression are required for
pain or pleasure to follow? Finally, they
seem in no way to know *the difference between simple Perception and Sense*;
nor how *Perception* can occur without *Sense*. For indeed

--- Page 306 ---
284 DE AUGM. SCIENT.
For this is only a controversy of words, but concerning a matter of utterly great importance. Therefore, concerning this *doctrine* (as being especially useful, and pertaining to very many things), let there be a better inquiry: Since even concerning this matter, so much ignorance could prevail among some of the Ancient Philosophers, that they thought the soul was infused into all bodies without distinction: For they did not see how *Motion* with discernment could occur without *Sense*; or *Sense* be present without *Soul*.

That a due inquiry concerning the *Form of Light* has not been made (especially since men labored strenuously in *Perspective*) could be considered a certain astonishing negligence. Indeed, neither in *Perspective*, nor elsewhere, has anything of value been inquired into concerning Light. Its radiations are treated, its origins by no means. But the ultimate placement of *Perspective* among *Mathematics* has produced this very defect, and other similar ones; because there was a premature departure from the Physicists. But the treatment of *Light*, and its causes, in Physics is again almost superstitious, as concerning a matter midway between Divine and Natural things; so much so that some of the Platonists introduced it as older than matter itself. For when space had been dispersed, they asserted by a very vain fiction that it had first been filled by light, and afterwards by body: when nevertheless the Sacred Scriptures have expressly stated that the dark mass of Heaven and Earth was created before Light. But those things which are treated physically and according to sense concerning it, those immediately [turn] to Radia-

--- Page 307 ---
            BOOK IV.             285
The inquiry descends to radiations, with the result that little physical investigation concerning this matter exists. But men ought to have directed their contemplations for a little while, and inquired what is common to all Luminous Bodies, as concerning the Form of Light. For how immense is the difference of body (if they are considered by their dignity) between the Sun and rotten wood, or even rotten fish scales? They ought also to have inquired what finally is the cause why some things ignite, and cast forth Light from themselves when heated, while others do not at all? Iron, metals, stones, glass, wood, oil, tallow, from fire either emit flame, or at least grow red: But water, air, heated with the fiercest, and as it were raging, heat, nevertheless acquire no Light, nor shine.
But if anyone should think this happens because it is proper for Fire to shine, and Water and Air are entirely inimical to Fire; he assuredly never rowed through the darkness of Night in salt water, in warm weather; when he could have seen drops of water, leaping up from the concussion of the oars, sparkle and glow. Which also happens in the warmer foam of the sea, which they call 'Sea Lung'.
What finally do Glow-worms and Fireflies, and the Indian Fly which illuminates an entire Chamber, and the eyes of certain Animals in the dark, and Sugar while being scraped or broken, and the sweat of a horse hurrying on a hot night, and some other things, have in common with flame and ignited substances? Indeed, men have seen so little in this matter, that most people [consider] sparks from flint [to be] air

--- Page 308 ---
286          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
rubbed air. Nevertheless, when air
does not become fiery with heat, and clearly re-
ceives *Light*, how then is it that owls, and
cats, and some other animals, see at night?
So much so that to the air itself (since vision is not
accomplished without *Light*) it is necessary that there be in it some
native and genuine *Light*, although very subtle
and weak, which nevertheless is proportioned to the visual
rays of such animals, and is sufficient for them to see. But the cause
of this problem (as of most) is that men
have not elicited from particular *Instances* the *Common Forms*
*of Natures*; This is what we have
posited as the proper subject of *Metaphysics*: Which is itself a part
of *Physics*, or the *Doctrine* of *Nature*.
Therefore, let an *Inquiry* be made concerning the *Form* and *Origins*
*of Light*, and let it meanwhile be placed among the *Desiderata*.
And concerning the *Doctrine* about the *substance of the soul*, both
*Rational* and *Sensible*, with its *Faculties*, and concerning the *Appendices*
*of the same Doctrine*, let these things have been said.

[A decorative floral woodcut tailpiece]

                                                                    FRAN-

--- Page 309 ---
287

OF FRANCIS BACON
OF VERULAM,
Viscount St. Alban,
Concerning the Dignity and Advancement
of Sciences,
BOOK FIVE.
To his King.

CHAPTER I.

Division of doctrine concerning the use and objects of the
human soul's faculties, into Logic and Ethics. Division
of Logic, into the Arts of Inventing, Judging, and Trans-
-mitting.

The doctrine concerning the Intellect, (O best
of Kings) and that other concerning the Will
of man, in their birth are as Twins. For indeed
the purity of illumination, and the liberty of will,
began together, together they fell. Nor is there
given in the Universe of Things, so intimate a Sym-
pathy, as that of Truth and Goodness. Wherefore the more
it will be a shame to learned Men, if Sciences are as
winged Angels, but to Lusts as Serpents that
crawl on the ground; carrying souls about, like a
mirror indeed, but stained.
We have now come to the doctrine concerning the use and objects
of the faculties of the human soul. That has two
parts, and those most well-known, and received by common
consent

--- Page 310 ---
288          Oɴ ᴛʜᴇ Aᴅᴠ. ᴏғ Lᴇᴀʀɴɪɴɢ.
received; Logic and Ethics: Except that civil doc-
trine, which is commonly placed as part of Ethics,
we have already emancipated, and constituted into a complete
doctrine concerning man in society, or in
community; here treating only of man as an
individual. Logic treats of the Intellect and
Reason; Ethics treats of the Will, Appetite, and Af-
fections: the one produces decrees, the other actions.
It is indeed true that imagination in both
provinces, both Judicial and Ministerial,
plays the part of a certain Legate, or Messenger,
or reciprocal Agent. For the senses deliver all sorts of
images to the imagination, concerning which reason
afterwards judges. But reason in turn transmits
chosen and approved images to the imagination,
before the execution of the decree takes place. In-
deed, voluntary motion is always preceded by,
and incited by imagination: so that
imagination is a common instrument to both, both
to reason and to will: except that
this Janus is Bifrons, and turns two
faces: for the face looking towards reason
has the image of truth; but the face looking towards
action, the image of Goodness: which faces never-
theless are,
—— Such as sisters ought to be.
Nor indeed is imagination a mere and bare Messenger;
but it either receives or usurps no small authority,
besides the simple delivery of a command. For Aristotle
rightly says: The soul has such command over the body
as a master over a slave: But Reason over imagination,
                                                                      such as

--- Page 311 ---
L I B E R V. 289
as a magistrate over a citizen in a free state: to whom authority can in turn revert. For we see that in matters of faith and religion, imagination ascends and is carried above reason itself: Not that Divine illumination has its place in imagination, (but rather in the very citadel of the mind and intellect:) but just as Divine grace in virtues uses the motions of the will; so similarly Divine Grace in illuminations uses the motions of imagination; whence it happens that Religion has always sought for itself an access and a way to the soul, through similitudes, types, parables, visions, dreams. Again, not humble is the kingdom of imagination in persuasions, insinuated by the force of eloquence. For when by the artifices of speech the minds of men are soothed, inflamed, and drawn in whatever direction; all that happens through the excitation of imagination, which, having now become unrestrained, not only insults reason, but in a way does violence to it, partly by blinding, partly by stimulating. Nevertheless, there seems no reason why we should depart from the former division. For imagination does not truly produce sciences: Indeed, Poetry (which from the beginning has been attributed to imagination) is to be regarded as a play of wit rather than a science. Moreover, we have assigned the power of imagination in natural things to the doctrine of the soul a little earlier. And that affinity which it has with Rhetoric, it is proper to refer to that art itself (of which we shall treat below).
   This part of human Philosophy, which pertains to Logic

--- Page 312 ---
/ 290          On the Adv. of Learning.
gic pertains, is less pleasing to the taste
and palate of most minds; and seems nothing else
than a snare and trap of thorny subtlety. For
just as it is truly said, *that Knowledge is the*
*food of the soul*: so in seeking and choosing this
food, most have acquired a palate similar to that
of the Israelites in the desert: whom a desire seized
to return to the *flesh-pots*; but *Manna* they grew
weary of: Which, although it was heavenly food,
was nevertheless felt to be less nourishing and savory.
In the same way (for the most part) those *Sciences*
are pleasing, which have some infusion of more
palatable meats. Such are *Civil History, Ethics,*
*Political Prudence*, around which the desires,
praises, and fortunes of men revolve, and are
occupied. But that *dry light* offends and parches
the soft and moist minds of many. However, if
one wishes to measure each thing by its proper
dignity, the *Reasons of Science* are altogether the
keys to the rest. And just as the *Hand is the instrument*
*of instruments, the Soul the form of forms*, so too
are these to be considered the *Arts of arts*. Nor
do they only direct, but also strengthen; just as
the practice and habit of archery not only makes
one aim better, but also makes one draw a stronger bow.
   The *Logical Arts* are four in number; divided
according to their ends, towards which they tend. For
this is what man does in *Rational matters*: Either that he
*may discover* what he *has sought*: Or *judge* what he
*has discovered*: Or *retain* what he *has judged*: Or
*transmit* what he *has retained*. It is therefore necessary
that there be as many *Arts*

--- Page 313 ---
LIBER V. 291
**Rational Arts.** The Art of Inquiry, or Invention: The Art of Examination, or Judgment: The Art of Custody, or Memory: & The Art of Elocution or Transmission. Of which we shall now speak individually.

CAP. II.
Division of the inventive art, into the inventive art of arts, and of arguments: And that the former of these (which excels) is lacking. Division of the inventive art of arts into literate experience; and a new organon. Delineation of literate experience.

**I**NVENTION has two species, truly very different from each other; One of arts and sciences; the other of arguments and discourses. I declare that the former of these is entirely lacking. Indeed, this seems to me to be such a defect; as if someone, in compiling an inventory of the goods of a deceased person, were to report: "Cash: nothing." For just as all other things are acquired by money; so too are the rest acquired through this art. And just as the West Indies would never have been discovered by us, had not the Invention of the Nautical Needle preceded it: although those regions are immense, and the movement of the compass needle is small: So there is no reason for anyone to wonder why greater progress has not been made in exploring and advancing the Arts; since the Art of inventing and exploring sciences is hitherto unknown. That this part of science is lacking, is plainly acknowledged. For in the first place, Dialectic professes nothing, indeed, does not even think, about inventing arts, whether Mechanical, or (what they call) Liberal.

--- Page 314 ---
292        ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
*Liberal arts, or even about their operations, but*
*about deriving their axioms; but as if passing by,*
*it addresses men and dismisses them, declaring*
*that each should trust the expert in their own field. Celsus, a*
*prudent man, not only a Physician (although it is customary*
*for everyone to pour forth in praise of their own Art),*
*speaking seriously and candidly about the Empiric and Dogmatic*
*sects of Physicians, confesses that medicines*
*and remedies were invented first, but causes*
*and reasons were discussed later; not in the reverse*
*order, that causes were first discovered from the nature of things,*
*and that these had guided the invention of remedies.*
*But Plato more than once suggests that particulars*
*are especially infinite: again, that generals exhibit less cer-*
*tain proofs: therefore, the essence of the sciences,*
*by which the skilled person is distinguished from the unskilled, consists in*
*middle propositions, which experience has handed down and taught*
*through individual sciences. Furthermore,*
and those who have spoken about the first Inventors of Things,
or the Origins of Sciences, have celebrated
chance rather than art; and they have
introduced brute animals, Quadrupeds, Birds,
Fish, Serpents, more than Men,
as Teachers of Sciences.
    *The Dictaean Mother plucks dittany from*
        *Ida,*
    *A stalk with downy leaves, and a purple*
    *flower. Not unknown is that herb to wild goats,*
    *When swift arrows stick in their back.*
So that it is by no means surprising, (since it is customary a-
                                                                    mong

--- Page 315 ---
LIBER V. 293
among the Ancients to consecrate the inventors of useful things) among the Egyptians, an ancient people (to whom very many *Arts* owe their beginnings), temples were full of images of Animals; but almost empty of images of men;
   *And the monstrous gods of every kind, and barking*
      *Anubis,*
   *Against Neptune, and Venus, and against*
      *Minerva, etc.*
But if you prefer, according to the tradition of the Greeks, to attribute the arts rather to men, as inventors: you would by no means say, however, that Prometheus applied contemplations to the invention of fire: or that when he first struck flint, he expected sparks: but that he stumbled upon it by chance, and (as they say) *committed a theft against Jupiter.* So that, as far as the invention of arts is concerned, to the wild goat for plasters, to the nightingale for musical modulations, to the ibis for intestinal washings; to the lid of a pot that burst, for artillery; finally (to speak in a word) we owe more to Chance, or to any other thing, than to Dialectic. Nor indeed is that method of invention much different, which Virgil rightly describes,
   *That practice, by meditating, might gradually forge various*
      *Arts*
      *Little by little.* ——————
For no other method of invention is proposed here than that of which the Animals themselves are capable, and which they frequently employ: namely, a most attentive concern about one thing, and its
               O               per-

--- Page 316 ---
294      On the Advancement of Sciences.
perpetual exercise, which the necessity of preserving themselves imposes on such animals. For Cicero very truly [said]; *“Practice devoted to one thing often conquers both Nature and Art.”* Wherefore if it is said of men,
—— *“Persistent labor overcomes all things,*
*And urgent necessity in difficult circumstances:”*
It is similarly asked concerning brute beasts,
*“Who taught the parrot its ‘Hello’?”*
Who instructed the crow, that in a great drought it should drop pebbles into a hollow tree, where it might by chance have seen water, so that it could reach the rising liquid with its beak? Who showed the way to the bees, who through the air, as if a vast sea, are accustomed to seek flowery fields, though far distant from their hives, and then return to their combs? Who taught the ant to gnaw around the grains to be stored in its hill beforehand, lest, when stored, they should sprout, and mock its hope? But if anyone notes in that Virgilian verse the word *“Extundere”*, which implies the difficulty of the matter; and the word *“Paulatim”*, which suggests slowness; we shall return whence we set out, to those Egyptian Gods; since hitherto men have used the faculty of reason only moderately, and by no means the method of art, for discovering inventions.
Secondly, this very thing which we assert (if it is observed a little more diligently) demonstrates the *form of Induction* which *Dialectic* proposes; by which, namely, the principles of sciences are discovered and proven; which is plainly faulty and incompetent, and so far from perfecting nature, that it
                                                                even

--- Page 317 ---
L I B E R V. 295
even perverts and distorts it. Whoever also
shall have acutely observed the method by which that ethereal
dew of the Sciences, similar to that of which the Poet speaks,
—— *Heavenly gifts of aerial honey*,
is gathered; (since the Sciences themselves are drawn out from individual
examples, partly natural, partly artificial, as from the flowers of a meadow and a garden)
he will certainly discover that the mind, of its own accord
and by its native disposition, performs *induction* more skillfully
than that which is described by the Dialecticians: For
from a mere enumeration of particulars (as Dialecticians are accustomed),
where no contradictory instance is found, it is fallaciously concluded;
nor does *Induction* of this kind produce anything else
than a probable conjecture. For who will guarantee, when
the particulars which one knows or remembers appear
only partially; that something does not lie hidden which
is altogether contrary? Just as if Samuel had acquiesced
in those sons of Jesse whom he saw brought before him
in the house, and had by no means sought David,
who was absent in the field. And this form of *Induction*
(if the whole truth is to be told) is so crude and coarse
that it seems incredible that such acute and subtle intellects
(as have exercised their meditations in these matters)
could have imposed it upon the world:
Were it not for the fact that their works, being hurried,
had hastened towards *Theories* and *Dogmas*:
Particulars, however, (especially a longer delay in them)
from a certain pride and haughtiness of mind,
O 2 despised-

--- Page 318 ---
296          Dᴇ Aᴜɢᴍ. Sᴄɪᴇɴᴛ.
despised. For they used examples, or particular instances, in the manner of lictors or messengers to clear away the crowd, so that they might open a path for their dogmas; but by no means did they call them into council from the beginning, so that a legitimate and mature deliberation about the truth of things might take place. Certainly, a certain pious and religious wonder would strike our minds, when we see the same footsteps trodden, leading to error, in divine and human matters. For just as in perceiving Divine Truth one can hardly bring oneself to become as a little child; so in learning Human [truth], for advanced individuals, to still read and review the first elements of inductions, like children, is considered a humble and almost contemptible thing.
     Thirdly, if it be granted that the principles of Sciences can be rightly established from *Induction*, as they use it, or from sense and experience, it is nevertheless most certain that lower axioms cannot be rightly and safely deduced from them by *Syllogism* (in Natural matters, which partake of Matter). For in *Syllogism*, the reduction of propositions to principles occurs through middle propositions. This Form, whether of *Discovery* or of *Proof*, has a place in *Popular Sciences* (such as *Ethics, Politics, Laws*, and the like): Indeed, even in *Theology*; inasmuch as God, in His goodness, has been pleased to accommodate Himself to human understanding: But in *Physics*, where nature operates, and it is not an adversary to be constrained by argument, truth plainly slips from our hands; because of the far greater [complexity] of natural operations than
                                                                    ver-

--- Page 319 ---
LIBER V. 297
of verbal subtlety: So much so that with
Syllogism failing, the office of Induction (true and corrected, that is)
is everywhere necessary, both for more general Prin-
ciples and for inferior propositions. For Syllogisms
consist of propositions; Propositions of words; Words
are the tokens of Notions. Therefore, if the notions themselves
(which are the souls of Words) are badly and inconsistently
abstracted from things; the whole Fabric collapses. Nor
will a laborious examination of either the consequences of
arguments, or the truth of propositions, ever restore
the matter to its integrity; since the error is (as the Physicians
say) in the first Digestion; which is not
rectified by subsequent functions. It is not, therefore, without a
Great and evident cause that several of the Philosophers
(some of them, moreover, most distinguished) were
Academics and Sceptics, who removed the certainty
of human Science and Comprehensions, denying that
it reached beyond verisimilitude or probability. I would
not deny that it seemed to some that Socrates,
when he removed the certainty of Science from himself,
did this only through Irony; and feigned Science
by dissimulating it: namely, by renouncing those
things which he manifestly knew, so that in that way he might
be thought to know even what he did not know. Nor indeed,
in the more recent Academy (which Cicero embraced),
was that Opinion of Acatalepsy cultivated very
sincerely. For those who flourished in Eloquence
almost adopted this sect for themselves, so that they might
discourse copiously on either side.
O 3

--- Page 320 ---
298      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING,
discoursing, they might attain glory: whence from that straight path, by which they ought to have proceeded to Truth, a deviation was made, as if to certain pleasant strolls undertaken for recreation. It is certain, however, that some, scattered in both Academies (the old and the new), and much more among the Sceptics, held that Acatalepsy simply and entirely. But in this they erred most greatly; that they calumniated the perceptions of the senses; whence they uprooted the Sciences. The senses, however, although they very often either deceive or fail men, can nevertheless, aided by much industry, suffice for the Sciences; And this not so much by the aid of instruments (although these also are useful in some part) as by Experiments of that kind, which can produce objects more subtle than the faculty of sense is able to grasp as sensible objects. But they ought rather to have imputed the defect in this part to the errors of the mind, and to its stubbornness, which refuses to be obedient to the things themselves, and to faulty demonstrations, and to modes of reasoning and concluding, wrongly instituted from the perception of the senses. But we say these things, not that anything should be detracted from the intellect, or that the whole task should be abandoned, but that suitable aids may be prepared and supplied to the intellect, by which it may overcome the difficulties of things and the obscurity of nature. For no one possesses such constancy of hand, or even skill, that he can draw a straight line, or circumscribe a perfect circle, with a free hand; which nevertheless by the aid of a ruler, or compass,

--- Page 321 ---
L I B E R V.             299
compass, is readily done. This, therefore, is the very thing which we prepare and with immense effort strive for; namely, that the mind through art may become commensurate with things; and that a certain art of *indication and direction* may be found, which may uncover the other arts, and their axioms and works, and bring them into view. For this we have rightly declared to be *wanting*.
  *This art of indication* (for so we shall call it) has two Parts: For either *the indication is transferred from experiments to experiments*; or *from experiments to axioms*, which themselves also *designate new experiments*. The former of these we shall name *Literate Experience*, but the latter *Interpretation of Nature, or New Organum*. The former indeed (as we have touched upon elsewhere) is scarcely to be considered an *Art*, or a *Part of Philosophy*, but rather a certain *sagacity*; whence also we sometimes call it *Pan's hunt* (borrowing this name from a fable). Yet, just as one can, on his way, proceed in a threefold manner: either when *he himself gropes in the dark*; or when *he is led by another's hand, himself seeing little*; or finally when *he directs his steps with light applied*: similarly, when one *attempts experiments of all kinds without any order or method*—that indeed is mere *groping*. But when he uses some *direction and order* in experimenting, it is as if he is led by hand. And this is what we understand by *Literate Experience*. For the light itself, which was the third (way), is to be sought from the *Interpretation of Nature, or New Organum*.
                O 4           Litera-

--- Page 322 ---
300      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF THE SCIENCES.
   Literate experience, or Pan's hunt, treats modes
of experimenting: It (when it is wanting) has been
proven, in silks least of all, (unless perhaps among the Chinese;)
Nor again in filamentous materials, composed of
bristles & hairs, from which is made (what we call)
camlet; Nor finally in woolens,
cotton, & furs; although these last three seem to be more
heterogeneous. Therefore they might rather be mixed in,
than be useful by themselves. Likewise, grafting in fruit-bearing
trees is in use: In wild trees it is rarely attempted;
although it is reported that an elm grafted into an elm mi-
                                                                  ras

--- Page 323 ---
L I B E R V. 301
produces wonderful shades of leaves. Grafting also in flowers is very rare, although this has now begun to be done in Muscatel roses, which are successfully inoculated into common roses. *We also place a variation in the part of the thing among variations in matter.* For we see, *a shoot grafted into the trunk of a tree sprouts more successfully than if it is committed to the earth.* Why should not also the seed of an onion, placed into the head of another green onion, sprout more successfully than if it were committed to the bare earth? And *here the root is varied for the trunk*, so that this thing may be seen as a kind of grafting in the root. *A variation of the experiment is made secondly in the efficient cause:* The rays of the sun through burning mirrors are so intensified by heat that they can ignite matter which easily catches fire: Can also the rays of the moon, through the same (mirrors), be activated to some very gentle degree of warmth, so that we may see whether all celestial bodies are warm in potential? Likewise, *radiant heats*, through mirrors of course, are intensified: Can also opaque heats

--- Page 324 ---
302          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
...some certainty: Which is entirely false.
A lead ball of one pound dropped from a tower (say) in the space of ten pulses, descends to the ground: Will a ball of two pounds (in which that Impetus, which they call Natural Motion, ought to be doubled) strike the ground in the space of five pulses? But it will descend in almost the same time, nor will it be accelerated according to the ratio of its Quantity. Likewise, one dram of sulfur (say) mixed with half a pound of steel, will make it flow and melt: Will therefore an ounce of sulfur suffice for four pounds of steel for melting? But that does not follow. For it is certain that the resistance of the matter in the patient, by quantity, is increased more than the activity of the virtue in the agent. Furthermore, too much deceives as much as too little. For in the smelting and purification of metals, it is a common error, that to promote the smelting, either the heat of the furnace, or the added

--- Page 325 ---
            BOOK V.            303
Regarding Quantity. And thus far concerning the variation of experiment.
  The production of experiment is twofold: Repetition, and
Extension: Namely, when either the experiment is
repeated, or it is urged to something more subtle. Let the example of Re-
petition be this: *Spirit of wine* is made from
wine by a single distillation, and is much
sharper and stronger than the wine itself. Will the
spirit of wine itself, distilled or sublimated, likewise
surpass itself in strength? But Repetition
also is not without fallacy: For indeed, when
the second exaltation does not equal the excess of the former,
then also very often through *the iteration of the experi-
ment, after a certain state, or peak of operation,*
nature is so far from progressing, that it rather relapses. Judgment therefore in this
matter must be applied. *Quicksilver,* in a linen cloth,
or otherwise inserted in the midst of molten lead, when it has
begun to cool, solidifies: nor does it
flow any longer. Will the same quicksilver, if

--- Page 326 ---
304      Oɴ ᴛʜᴇ Aᴅᴠ. ᴏғ Lᴇᴀʀɴɪɴɢ
akin to wine, but perhaps more delicate? Likewise, *a magnet attracts whole iron:* Will also a piece of magnet, immersed in a dissolution of iron, attract iron to itself, and coat itself with iron? Likewise, *the needle of a nautical compass applies itself to the poles of the world:* Will it also [do so] by the same way and consequence as celestial bodies? Namely, if someone places the needle in the opposite position, that is, in the Southern point, and holds it for a little while, and then releases the force: will the needle perhaps move towards the North, choosing rather to rotate through the West to the desired position, than through the East? Likewise, *Gold, placed next to quicksilver, absorbs it.* But does gold truly receive that quicksilver within itself, without an extension of its mass, so that a certain mass is formed which is heavier than the gold itself? Likewise, *men serve memory by placing images of persons in places.* Will they also achieve the same by dismissing the places, and by attaching actions or habits to persons? And concerning the *Production of Experiment* thus far.
   *The translation of experiment is threefold:* Either *from Nature or chance into art:* Or *from one art or practice into another:* Or *from a part of some art into a different part of the same.* Of the *translation from nature or chance into art* there are innumerable examples: so much so that almost all mechanical arts, from slender beginnings, provided by nature or chance, have had their origin. It was a received adage, *a cluster of grapes ripens faster against a cluster of grapes:* Which became common concerning mutual works and duties of friendship. But
                                                               our

--- Page 327 ---
LIBER V. 305
our makers of Cider (that is, wine from apples) imitate this very well. For they take care that the apples are not bruised or pressed before, having been thrown into heaps for some time, they have ripened by mutual contact; whereby the excessive acidity of the drink may be corrected. Likewise, the *imitation of artificial rainbows* from a thick sprinkling of droplets has been easily transferred from natural rainbows from a dewy cloud. Likewise, the *method of distillation* could be derived either from seeking it from on high, that is, from rains or dew; or from that humble experiment of droplets adhering to pans placed over pots of boiling water. But who would have dared to imitate *thunder* and *lightning*, had not the lid of that Chemist Monk, suddenly thrown upwards with great force and crash, suggested it. But the more this matter abounds in examples, the fewer it will be necessary to adduce. But men ought to have, if they had leisure to inquire into useful things, observed natural works and individual operations attentively, minutely, and in combination; and to think perpetually and keenly with themselves which of them could be transferred to the arts. For nature is the mirror of art.

Nor are there fewer experiments which can be transferred *from art to art, or from practice to practice*; although this is more rarely in use. For nature meets everyone everywhere; but individual arts are known only to their own craftsmen. *Eyeglasses* were invented to help weak sight. Can anyone also devise some instrument which, attached to the ears, for the hard of hearing, to hear—

--- Page 328 ---
306      On the Advancement of Learning
help with hearing? Likewise, *embalming practices*, and *honey*
*preserve corpses*; Could not something
from these be transferred into medicine, which might also
benefit living bodies? Likewise, the *practice of seals*
*in wax, cements*, and *lead*, was ancient:
But this also showed the way to printing on paper, or to the art
of typography. Likewise, *salt in*
*cooking seasons meats*, and that better in winter
than in summer. Could not this be usefully transferred to Baths,
and their temperature, when needed, either to be imparted,
or removed. Likewise, Salt, in a recent Experi-
*ment, concerning Artificial Congelations*,
is found to obtain great powers for condensing:
Could not this be transferred to the Condensations
of metals: since it has long been known that
strong waters, composed of some salts, cast
down and precipitate particles of Gold,
from some metals less dense than gold itself?
Likewise, *Painting, by an Image renews the Memory of a thing*:
Has not this been transferred into that *art* which
they call, the *Art of Memory*?

Concerning these things in general, let it be noted:
That nothing can avail so much towards a certain shower of useful
and new inventions, as if it were to be drawn
down from heaven, as if the experiments of several mechanical
arts should come to the knowledge of one man, or a few,
who can sharpen each other by conversations:
so that through this, which we call, the *translation of experiments*,
the arts may mutually foster each other, and, as if by a mixture of
rays, ignite each other. For although the *way*
                                                                 *of reason* [...]

--- Page 329 ---
L I B E R V. 307
rational way may promise far greater things through an instrument: nevertheless, this *sagacity*, through *learned experience*, will meanwhile cast forth and scatter many things from those which are at hand, for mankind, like the Donativa missiles among the Ancients. There remains that *translation from one part of an art to a different part*; which differs little from the translation from one art to another: But because some arts occupy large fields, so that they can also contain the *translation of experiments* within themselves, it seemed good to subjoin this species of *translation* as well. Especially, because it is absolutely of great importance in some art. For it will be very beneficial for amplifying the art of *medicine*, if the experiments of *that part of medicine concerning the cures of diseases* are transferred to those parts concerning *preserving health*, and *prolonging life*. For if *some remarkable opiate*, for the raging spirits, in a pestilential disease,

--- Page 330 ---
308          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCES.
downwards? For example, take an *iron*
*rod*, and heat it at one end; and then
set the iron upright, with the heated part placed underneath;
if a hand is placed on the upper part, it will immediately
burn the hand: but with the heated part placed above,
and the hand underneath, it will burn much more slowly.
Also, if the entire rod is heated, and one end
is moistened with snow, or a sponge dipped in cold water.
If the snow or sponge is placed above,
will (I ask) it send cold downwards more quickly
than if placed below, it sends it upwards? Likewise, *sunbeams*
*scatter over white*, over black they gather:
Do shadows also scatter over black,
and gather over white? This
is what we see happen in a dark place, with light admitted
only through a small opening, where images
of things outside are received upon paper,
which is white, but not at all upon black.
Likewise, *the vein of the forehead is cut for a hemicranial*
*pain*: Is the hemicranium also scarified
for a headache? And so much for the *Inversion of Experiment*
thus far.

     *Compulsion of experiment* occurs when an experiment is
pressed and extended to the annihilation,
or deprivation of a virtue: For in other
hunts, the wild beast is only captured: But in this one, it is
killed. An example of *Compulsion* is this. *A magnet*
*attracts iron*: Therefore, press the iron, or press
the magnet, so that attraction no longer occurs:
For instance, will the magnet perhaps lose its
virtue, or at least diminish it, if it has been burned, or
soaked in strong acids? Conversely, if steel,

--- Page 331 ---
LIBER V. 309

steel, or iron be reduced to crocus martis,
or into steel, which they call prepared,
or even be dissolved in aqua fortis, will the magnet
still attract them? Furthermore, the magnet attracts iron
through all media that we know, namely if
gold, silver, glass are placed in between. Therefore, press
for some medium, if it can be done, which
intercepts the virtue; Let quicksilver be tested:
Let oil, gum, ignited charcoal be tested, and
other things which have not yet been tested. Likewise,
spectacles have recently been introduced, which multiply
minute visible things in wondrous ways. Press their use,
either for objects so tiny that they are no longer
effective; or so rather large that they are
confused. Namely, will they be able to clearly detect
in urine those things which otherwise would not be seen?
Will they be able in gems, pure and bright
in every part, to show grains or cloudlets to be seen?
Will they also show tiny dust particles in the sun
(which were most falsely objected to Democritus as his Atoms,
and principles of things) as rather large bodies? Will they show
rather coarse powder, from cinnabar and ceruse,
so distributed that here red grains appear, there white?
Will they again show larger images (for example, a face,
an eye, etc.) multiplied to such an extent as a flea
or a small worm? Will they show byssus,
or such a finer woven linen, and a little more open,
so perforated as if it were a net?
But in the compulsions of experiments we dwell less,
because almost beyond

--- Page 332 ---
310 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
fall outside the limits of learned experience, and rather pertain to causes, and axioms, and the New Organum. For wherever there is a negative, or privative, or exclusive instance, some light has already begun to be offered towards the discovery of forms. And concerning the compulsion of experiment, thus far.
      The application of experiment is nothing other than its ingenious transfer to some other useful experiment. Let such an example be: *All bodies have their own dimensions, their own weights:* Gold has more weight, less dimension, than silver: Water, than Wine. From this a useful experiment is derived, so that from a filled measure, and the weight taken, you can discern how much silver has been mixed with gold, or water with wine; which was that "Eureka!" of Archimedes. Likewise, *Meats in some cellars putrefy more quickly than in others:* It would be useful to transfer this experiment to discern airs, more or less healthy; for habitation; where, namely, meats are preserved longer from putrefaction: the same can be applied to reveal healthier or more pestilential seasons of the year. But there are innumerable such things. Let men only awaken, and continually turn their eyes, sometimes to the nature of things, sometimes to human uses. And concerning the application of experiment, thus far.
      The coupling of experiment is a connection and chain of applications; when things which would not have been useful individually for some purpose, are effective when connected. For example; *You wish to have late roses or fruits:* This will happen, if you pluck off the earlier buds
                                                                        ...

--- Page 333 ---
L I B E R V.      311
you pluck off; The same will happen if you lay bare the roots, until mature spring, and expose them to the air; But much more so if both are combined. Likewise, for *cooling, ice and saltpeter are most effective: both mixed together much more so.* But this thing is also clear in itself. Yet a fallacy can often underlie it (as in all things where *axioms* are lacking) if the coupling is made from things which operate in diverse and, as it were, conflicting ways. And *so much for the coupling of experiments.*

  *There remain the experiments of chance.* But this method of experimenting is plainly irrational, and as it were, mad: when the desire to try something comes to mind, not because either reason or some other *experiment* leads you to it, but entirely because a similar thing has never yet been attempted. Yet I do not know whether in this very matter (of which we are now speaking) some other great thing may not lie hidden: if, I say, every stone...

--- Page 334 ---
312      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
settle, vapors are gathered into receptacles after they have wandered. But no mortal has yet attempted *closed distillation* (for thus we can call it): It seems probable, however, that the force of heat, if it performs its operations in altering within the confines of the body; since neither loss of body occurs, nor even liberation; then finally it would drive this Proteus of matter, as if held by manacles, to many transformations, if only the heat is so tempered and alternated that no breaking of vessels occurs. For this thing is similar to a Natural matrix, where heat operates, nothing of the body is either emitted or separated: Except that in a matrix, nourishment is joined: but as far as conversion is concerned, the thing seems the same. Such therefore are the *lots of experiment.*

      Meanwhile, concerning experiments of this kind, we advise that no one should lose heart or be, as it were, confounded, if the experiments to which he applies himself do not answer his expectation. For what succeeds may please more; but what does not succeed often informs no less. And this must always be kept in mind (which we perpetually insist upon), that *light-bearing experiments* are to be sought even still more than *fruit-bearing ones*. And concerning *literate Experience* let these things have been said; which (as we have already said) is rather *sagacity*, and a certain hunting scent, than *science*. Concerning the *New Organon*, however, we are silent, nor do we taste anything of it beforehand; Because concerning it (since it is

--- Page 335 ---
LIBER V. 313
Since concerning it (as it becomes the greatest of all things) we intend to complete the entire work (with divine favor assenting).

C A P. III.

Division of the Invention of Arguments, into Promptuary & Topical. Division of the Topical, into General, & Particular. Example of Particular Topical, in Inquiry. On Heavy & Light.

The Invention of Arguments is not Invention properly speaking. For to invent is to discover unknown things, not to receive or recall things previously known. But the use and function of this kind of Invention seems to be nothing other than to skillfully draw forth, from the mass of Knowledge which is stored up and hidden in the mind, those things which pertain to the matter or question proposed. For to him to whom little or nothing concerning the proposed subject is known, the Topics of Invention are of no use; On the contrary, he who has ready at hand what can be brought to bear on the matter, will, even without art and the Topics of Invention, at last find and produce arguments (though not so expeditiously and conveniently). So much so that this kind of Invention (as we have said) is not Invention properly speaking; but merely a reduction to memory, or a suggestion with application. Nevertheless, since the term has gained currency and been received, let it indeed be called Invention; Indeed, even the hunting and finding of some wild animal can be said no less when it is sought within the enclosures of game parks, than when in open forests. But setting aside ver-

--- Page 336 ---
314      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCES.
verbal quibbles, let this be established: the aim and
purpose of this matter is a certain readiness,
and a ready use of our knowledge,
rather than its amplification, or
increase.
   And so that a store of material for discussion may be ready, a two-
fold method can be adopted. Either that it be designated, and
as it were shown by an index, to what parts one ought
to investigate the matter; and this is what
we call *Topics*. Or that arguments already
composed beforehand, and stored for use, concerning
those matters which more frequently occur, and come
into debate: and this we shall name *Promptuary*.
This latter, however, scarcely deserves to be called a part
of *Science*, since it consists more in diligence
than in any artificial erudition. Nevertheless, in this part, Aristo-
tle, ingeniously indeed, but nevertheless harmfully,
ridicules the sophists of his time, saying: *They act*
*just as if someone, professing to be a shoemaker,*
*did not teach the method of making a shoe, but only exhibited*
*very many shoes, of diverse form as well*
*as size.* However, here it may be retorted; A shoe-
maker, if he had no shoes in his workshop,
nor made them unless asked; would remain utterly
poor, and would find very few buyers. But far otherwise
our *Savior*, speaking of *Divine Knowledge*,
says, *Every Scribe instructed in the Kingdom*
*of Heaven, is like a householder, who*
*brings forth from his treasure things New and Old.* We
see also that ancient Rhetoricians instructed orators,

--- Page 337 ---
L I B E R V.          315
...had instructed, that they should have ready *Commonplaces*,
various, already long ago prepared, and treated and illustrated
on both sides: *For example, for the spirit of the Law against the words of the Law,*
*and vice versa: For the Credibility of Arguments against Testimonies,*
*and vice versa.* But Cicero himself,
taught by long experience, plainly asserts,
that a diligent and assiduous Orator can already have premeditated and elaborated
whatever things will come into dispute: So much so that in the very pleading of the case,
nothing new or sudden will need to be introduced,
except new names and some special circumstances. But Demosthenes'
diligence and carefulness proceeded to such an extent,
that since the first approach and entry to a case, for preparing
the minds of the audience, had very great power, he thought it worthwhile
to compose many introductions of speeches and orations
and to have them ready. And these examples and authorities could deservedly
outweigh Aristotle's opinion, who
would be an advocate for us to exchange the *Wardrobe for the Scissors*.
Therefore this part of *doctrine* concerning *Promptuarium* ought not to be omitted.
About which enough in this place. For since it is common to both
Logic and Rhetoric, it seemed good to touch upon it here only cursorily
among logical matters; reserving its fuller treatment for Rhetoric.

   The other part of *Invention* (namely *Topics*)
we will divide into *General & Particular*.
That *General* part is that which in *Dialectic* diligently
                                             and ab-

--- Page 338 ---
316      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
and has been abundantly treated; so that there is no need to dwell on its explanation. It seems, however, that this should be briefly noted: that this Topic (or system of Topics) is useful not only in Argumentations, where we engage with others, but also in meditations, when we ourselves ponder or reflect upon something. Indeed, its utility is not confined solely to this, that from it there should arise a suggestion or admonition as to what we should affirm or assert; but also as to what we should inquire about or ask. But a prudent question is, as it were, half of knowledge. Rightly indeed Plato says, "He who seeks something, comprehends that very thing which he seeks by some general notion: otherwise, how can it happen that he recognizes it when it has been found?" Therefore, the more ample and certain our anticipation has been, the more direct and concise will our investigation be. Therefore, those same topics which will be conducive to stirring up the recesses of our intellect within us, and drawing forth the knowledge accumulated there, will also help in drawing forth knowledge from outside: so that if someone knowledgeable and skilled is at hand, he can be conveniently and prudently questioned by us about it; and similarly, authors, and books, and parts of books, which teach and inform us about those things which we seek, can be usefully selected and perused.

      But *Particular Topics* contributes much more to what we are discussing, and is to be considered a most fruitful thing. Certainly, a slight mention of it has been made by some writers, but it has by no means been treated fully and with the dignity due to the subject. But
                                                              missum

--- Page 339 ---
LIBER V. 317
dismissing that vice and arrogance which have reigned too long in the Schools: namely, that they pursue what is at hand with infinite subtlety, but do not even touch what is a little more remote: we indeed embrace *Particular Topics* as a most useful thing; that is, *places of inquiry and invention*, appropriated to particular *subjects and sciences*. But these are certain mixtures of *Logic and the Matter itself*, proper to individual *Sciences*. For it is clearly futile, and characteristic of a narrow mind, to suppose that a *perfect Art of Inventing Sciences* can be devised and proposed from the very beginning, and that the same should afterwards be put into practice and exercised. But let men know for certain that *solid and true Arts of Invention grow and gain increments with the inventions themselves*: So much so that when someone first approaches the investigation of any *science*, he can have some useful *Inventive Precepts*; but after he has made greater progress in the *Science itself*, he can and should also devise new *Precepts of Invention*, which may lead him more successfully to further things. Indeed, this matter is similar to a path begun on a plain: for after we have traversed some part of the path, we have not only gained this, that we have approached closer to the end of the journey, but also that we may see more clearly what remains of the path. In the same way, in *Sciences*, each step of the journey, having passed over those things which it left behind, also brings those things which remain closer into view.

But an example of this *Topic*, since we P among

--- Page 340 ---
318          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
among the *Desiderata*, it seemed good to subjoin.

*Particular Topic, or Articles of Inquiry*
*concerning Heavy and Light.*

1. Let inquiry be made as to what sort of Bodies are susceptible to the Motion of gravity, what sort to lightness; and if there are any Intermediates, or of an Indifferent Nature?

2. After inquiry concerning simple Gravity and Lightness, let us proceed to comparative inquiry; Namely, which among Heavy things weigh more, which less, in the same Dimension? Also, which among Light things are carried upwards more quickly, which more slowly?

3. Let inquiry be made concerning what the Quantity of a Body can do and effect regarding the Motion of Gravity? And this might seem at first glance almost superfluous, because the principles of Motion ought to follow the principles of Quantity. But the matter stands otherwise. For although in scales, Quantity compensates for the Gravity of the body itself (the forces of the body everywhere converging through repercussion, or the resistance of the scales or beam), nevertheless, where little resistance is given (as in the Fall of bodies through the air), the Quantity of the body has little power to incite Descent; Since twenty pounds of lead, and one pound, fall in almost the same space?

4. Let inquiry be made, whether the Quantity of a body can be so increased that the Motion of Gravity is entirely laid aside? as happens in the globe of the earth, which is suspended, it does not fall. Whether therefore there can be other masses so great-

--- Page 341 ---
L I B E R V. 319
great, so that they sustain themselves? For motion towards the center of the earth is a fictitious thing: And every great mass shuns any motion of translation, unless it is overcome by another stronger appetite.
   5. Let it be inquired concerning what the resistance of the intervening or opposing body can do and effect for the regulation of the motion of gravity. Indeed, a descending body either penetrates and cuts through the opposing body: Or it is stopped by it. If it penetrates, penetration occurs: Either with slight resistance, as in Air: Or with stronger, as in water. If it is stopped, it is stopped either by unequal resistance, where there is an over-weighting, as if wood is placed upon wax. Or water, as if water is placed upon water; or wood, upon wood of the same kind. That which the School calls (with a certain empty apprehension) that a body does not weigh except outside its own place. And all these things vary the motion of gravity: For heavy bodies move differently in scales, differently in falling: Also differently (which might seem strange) in scales suspended in air, differently in scales immersed in water: differently in falling through water, differently in floating, or carried upon water.
   6. Let it be inquired concerning what the Figure of a descending Body can do and effect for regulating the mode of gravity? such as a broad figure with thinness, cubic, oblong, round, pyramidal: and when bodies turn themselves, when they remain in the same position in which they are released?
   7. Let it be inquired concerning what the Continuation and Progression of the Fall or Descent itself can do and effect, to the end that it may be carried with greater incitation and impetus? and in what proportion, and how far
                                  P 2                      inva-

--- Page 342 ---
320          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCES.
how far may that incitement grow strong? since indeed the ancients, with slight contemplation, believed (since this is a natural motion) that it is perpetually increased and intensified.
     8. Let it be inquired concerning this, what power and effect has the distance, or proximity of a body descending from the Earth, to this end, that it falls faster, or slower, or even not at all, (if only it were outside the sphere of activity of the Earth's globe, which was Gilbert's opinion:) And at the same time concerning this, what effect has the immersion of a descending body deeper into the earth, or the placement of the same closer to the surface of the earth? For this matter also varies the motion, as is evident to those working in Mines.
     9. Let it be inquired concerning this, what power and effect has the difference of bodies, through which the motion of gravity is diffused and communicated: and whether it is equally communicated through soft and porous bodies, as through hard and solid ones: as if the beam of a balance were on one side a wooden pan, on the other a silver one, although they have been reduced to the same weight, whether it does not produce a variation in the balance pans? Similarly, whether metal, placed upon wool or an inflated bladder, weighs the same as in the bottom of the balance pan?
     10. Let it be inquired concerning this, what power and effect has, in the communication of the Motion of Gravity, the distance of the body from the fulcrum: That is, the quick and slow perception of pressure, or depression: As in balances, where one part of the beam is longer, (although reduced to the same weight) does this very thing incline the balance? Or in curved tubes, where the longer part will certainly draw water; although the shorter part, made

--- Page 343 ---
L I B E R V. 321
made indeed more capacious, may contain a greater weight of
water.
    11. Let inquiry be made concerning what Intermixture, or
Coupling, of a Light Body with a Heavy Body can do for
increasing the body's gravity in the weight of living and dead
animals?
    12. Let inquiry be made concerning the hidden Ascents and De-
scents of lighter and heavier parts within one integral body:
from which accurate separations often occur? as in the separation
of wine and water: in the rising of cream, milk, and similar cases.
    13. Let inquiry be made concerning what is the Line and Direction
of the motion of Gravity, and how far it follows either the
center of the earth, that is, the mass of the earth, or the center
of the body itself, that is, the Connection of its parts. For those
centers, though suitable for demonstrations, are of no avail in Nature.
    14. Let inquiry be made concerning the Comparison of the Motion of Gra-
vity with other Motions; which it overcomes, and to which it yields?
As in Violent Motion (as they call it), the motion of gravity is
restrained for a time: Also, when a much greater weight of iron is
lifted by a small magnet, the motion of gravity yields to the motion
of sympathy.
    15. Let inquiry be made concerning the Motion of Air, whether it is
carried upwards, or is as it were indifferent? Which is difficult
to discover, except by some exquisite experiments. For the emission
of air at the bottom of water occurs rather by the impact of the water,
than by the motion of the air, since the same also occurs in wood.
But air mixed with air reveals nothing, since air exhibits no less
lightness in air, than water exhibits gravity
                                    P 3                                     in

--- Page 344 ---
322          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
in water: But in a bubble, covered with a thin film,
it remains for a time.
   16. *Let an inquiry be made*, what is the Limit of Lightness?
For not, just as they posited the center of the earth as
the center of gravity, do they wish (I believe) that
the outermost convexity of Heaven should be the limit of lightness.
Or rather, just as heavy things seem to be carried to the point
that they settle, and as if to something immobile, so light
things are carried to the point that they begin to rotate, and
as if to motion without end?
   17. *Let an inquiry be made*, what is the cause, why Vapors
and Exhalations are carried so high, as the Region
(which they call) the middle of the air is situated? although
they are of somewhat dense Matter, and the sun's Rays by turns
(at night, that is) cease.
   18. *Let an inquiry be made* concerning the Regulation of the Upward Motion of Flame.
Which is the more abstruse, because the flame perishes at every
moment, unless perhaps in the midst of larger Flames:
For flames separated from their continuity, last but little.
   19. *Let an inquiry be made* concerning the Upward Motion of Heat's
Activity itself: just as when heat in glowing iron
spreads more quickly upwards, than downwards.
   Let this, therefore, be an example of a particular Topic.
Meanwhile, that which we began to advise, we advise again.
Namely, that men ought to alternate their particular Topics,
so that after some significant progress has been made in inquiry,
they may establish another and then another Topic; if only
they desire to ascend to the pinnacles of the Sciences. We
however attribute so much to particular Topics,
                                                                           that

--- Page 345 ---
LIBER V. 223
that we intend to complete a specific work concerning them, in more worthy and more obscure natural subjects. For we are masters of questions, but not likewise of things. And so much for the Art of Invention.

CHAP. IV.
*Division of the art of Judging, into Judgment by Induction*
*and by Syllogism. Of which the former is assigned to the*
*Novum Organum. First division of Judgment by Syllogism*
*into Direct, and Inverse Reduction. Its second*
*division into Analytics, and the Doctrine of Elenchi. Division*
*of the Doctrine of Elenchi, into Elenchi of Sophisms,*
*Elenchi of Interpretation, and Elenchi of Images, or Idols.*
*Division of Idols, into Idols of the Tribe, Idols of the Cave,*
*and Idols of the Marketplace. Appendix to the Art of Judging,*
*namely concerning the Analogy of Demonstrations according to the Nature of the Subject.*

[Large initial T] Let us now pass to Judgment, or the Art
of Judging, which deals with the nature of proofs,
or demonstrations. But in this art of Judging (as is also
commonly accepted) one concludes either by Induction,
or by Syllogism. For Enthymemes, and Examples,
are merely compendia of those two. But
as far as Judgment, which is made by Induction,
there is nothing that should detain us:
For by one and the same operation of the mind, that
which is sought, and found, and judged.
Nor indeed is the matter transacted through some medium,
but immediately, in almost the same way, as it happens
in sense (perception). For sense in its primary
objects at once grasps the species of the object, and its
P 4 veri-

--- Page 346 ---
324      DE AUGM. SCIENT.
...truth assents: But it is otherwise in Syllogism; whose proof is not immediate, but is perfected through a medium. Therefore, one thing is *Discovery of the Middle Term*, another is *Judgment concerning the Consequence of the Argument*. For first the mind discourses, then it rests. But we bid farewell entirely to the vicious form of *Induction*; we refer the legitimate form to the *Novum Organum*. Therefore, concerning *Judgment by Induction*, enough in this place.

What need is there to speak of that other (judgment) by *Syllogism*? since this matter has been almost worn out by the most subtle files of intellects, and reduced to many minute details. Nor is it strange, since it is a matter that has great sympathy with the human intellect. For the human mind strives and yearns in wondrous ways for this, that it may not be suspended, but may acquire something fixed and immobile, upon which, as upon a firmament, it may lean in its excursions and investigations. Indeed, just as Aristotle tries to prove that in every motion of bodies something is found that rests, and most elegantly transfers the ancient fable of Atlas, who himself upright sustained the Heavens on his shoulders, to the Poles of the World, around which rotations are performed: Similarly, men eagerly desire to have within themselves an Atlas of thoughts, or Poles, which may in some measure govern the fluctuations and giddiness of the intellect, fearing, of course, lest their Heaven should fall. Therefore, they hastened too quickly to establish the Principles of Sciences, around which all variety of disputes might revolve, without danger of ruin and fall: Not knowing

--- Page 347 ---
L I B E R V. 325
indeed, that he who too hastily seizes certainties will end up in uncertainties; but he who has timely restrained judgment will arrive at certainties.

It is therefore manifest that *this Art of Judging by Syllogism* is nothing else than the reduction of propositions to principles through middle terms. Principles, however, are understood as received by consensus, and are exempt from question. But the invention of middle terms is permitted to the free acuteness and investigation of intellects. *Now that reduction is twofold, namely direct and inverse. Direct is,* when the proposition itself is reduced to the principle itself: This is called *ostensive proof*. *Inverse is,* when the contradictory of the proposition is reduced to the contradictory of the principle; which they call *proof by inconvenience*. The number of middle terms, however, or their scale, is diminished or increased, according to the remoteness of the proposition from the principle.

These things having been established, we will divide *the Art of Judgment* (as is commonly almost customary) into *Analytics, and the Doctrine of Elenchi:* The one indicates, the other guards against: For *Analytics* establishes true forms concerning the consequences of arguments; if one varies from these, or deviates, the conclusion is found to be faulty. And this very thing contains in itself a certain elenchus, or refutation. *For the straight (as it is said) is both an index of itself and of the crooked.* Nevertheless, it is safest to employ Elenchi as monitors, so that falla-
            P 5                         cies

--- Page 348 ---
326 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
fallacies, which would otherwise ensnare judgment. But in *Analytics* we find nothing lacking; rather it is burdened with superfluities than it needs additions.

We propose to divide the *Doctrine of Elenchi* into three parts: *Elenchi of Sophisms*, *Elenchi of Interpretation*, and *Elenchi of Images or Idols*. The *Doctrine of Elenchi of Sophisms* is exceedingly useful: For although a grosser kind of fallacies is aptly compared by Seneca with the tricks of jugglers—in which we do not know how the thing is managed, yet we know well enough that the matter stands otherwise than it appears—more subtle *Sophisms*, however, not only accomplish that one has nothing to reply, but also seriously confound judgment itself.

This Part concerning the *Elenchi of Sophisms* has been excellently treated by Aristotle, as regards Precepts; and even better by Plato, as regards Examples: Yet not that in the person of the Sophists Ant-

--- Page 349 ---
L I B E R V. 327
to consider the arguments to be constructed and arranged by means of those very sophisms. This kind of ability is also considered excellent, and brings no small advantages. Although that distinction between an orator and a sophist has been elegantly introduced by someone; that the one, like a hound, excels in speed; the other, like the hare itself, in dodging.

Next come the Refutations of Interpretation: for thus (borrowing the word rather than the sense from Aristotle) shall we call them. Therefore, let us recall to men's memory those things which we said above concerning transcendentals, and concerning the adventitious conditions or adjuncts of beings (when we were treating of First Philosophy). These are: greater, lesser; much, little; prior, posterior; same, different; potency, act; habit, privation; whole, parts; agent, patient; motion, rest; being, non-being; and similar things. But first of all, let them remember and note the different contemplations of these things which we mentioned: namely, that they can be investigated either Physically or Logically. We assigned the Physical treatment concerning them to First Philosophy. Logic remains: and this very thing is what we presently call the Doctrine of Refutations of Interpretation. This is certainly a sound and good portion of doctrine. For those general and common notions have this quality, that they run through everywhere in all disputations; so much so that unless they are accurately, and with anxious judgment, well distinguished from the very beginning, they will in wonderful ways cast a mist upon the universal light of disputations,
P 6 and thereby

--- Page 350 ---
328. ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
and will almost bring the matter to the point where disputations cease to be mere battles of words. For equivocations and ill-conceived understandings of words (especially of this kind) are *Sophisms of Sophisms*. Therefore, it has also seemed better to establish the treatment of these separately, rather than to admit it either into *First Philosophy* or *Metaphysics*, or to subject it partially to *Analytics*, as Aristotle rather confusedly did. We have given it a name from its use, because its true use is plainly refutation and caution concerning the use of words. Moreover, we believe that that part concerning *Predicaments*, if rightly instituted, obtains its principal use in cautions against confusing or transposing the terms of definitions and divisions, and we prefer it to be referred here as well. And so much for the *Elenchs of Hermeneutics*.

As for the *Elenchs of Images* or *Idols*, *Idols* are indeed the deepest fallacies of the human mind. For they do not deceive in particulars, like the others, by casting a mist over judgment and setting snares; but plainly from a corrupt and wrongly constituted predisposition of the mind, which, as it were, distorts and infects all anticipations of the intellect. For the *human mind* (veiled and obscured by the body) is so far from being like a plain, even, and clear mirror, which sincerely receives and reflects the rays of things, that it is rather like some enchanted mirror, full of superstitions and specters. Now *Idols* are imposed upon the intellect either by the *very general nature of the human race*: or by the nature—

--- Page 351 ---
L I B E R. V. 329
the individual nature of each person: or through words or communicative nature. The first kind we are accustomed to call Idols of the Tribe, the second Idols of the Cave, the third Idols of the Marketplace. There is also a fourth kind, which we call Idols of the Theater, and it is superinduced by corrupt Theories, or Philosophies, and by perverse Laws of Demonstrations: But this kind can be denied and set aside: Therefore, for the present, we will omit it. But the rest plainly besiege the mind, nor can they be entirely uprooted. Therefore, there is no reason for anyone to expect any *Analytics* in them: but *Doctrine of Elenchi* is, concerning the *Idols* themselves, the *primary Doctrine*. Nor (if the whole truth must be told) can the *Doctrine of Idols* be reduced to an art: but only a certain contemplative prudence must be applied to guard against them. However, a full and subtle treatment of these, to the *New Organ*

--- Page 352 ---
330          On the Advancement of Sciences.
had escaped; and being pressed by questioning, whether then at last he would acknowledge Neptune's Divinity? he asked in return, *“But where are those depicted who perished after having made vows?”* And the same is the reasoning for similar superstitions, as in Astrology, Dreams, Omens, and the rest. Another Example is of this kind: *“The human mind (since it is itself a substance equal and uniform) presupposes and attributes to the nature of things a greater equality and uniformity than actually exists.”* Hence the mathematicians' fiction, *“that in celestial bodies all things move in perfect Circles,”* rejecting spiral lines: Hence it also happens that although many things in Nature are singular and full of inequality; human thought nevertheless always attributes *“Relatives, Parallels, and Conjugates:”* For from this source the element of fire with its own sphere was introduced, to constitute a quaternion with the other three, Earth, Water, Air. The Chemists, moreover, constructed a fanatical array of all things, falsely imagining by a most empty fiction that in those four elements of theirs (Heaven, Air, Water, and Earth), each species is found parallel to each other, and conformable. A third Example is very similar to the preceding; *“that man becomes, as it were, the norm and mirror of Nature:”* For it is not credible (if each thing is examined and noted) how great a host of *Idols* has been introduced into Philosophy by the reduction of natural operations to the likeness of human actions: This very thing, I say, that it is thought that nature does such things as man does.
                                                                    Nor

--- Page 353 ---
L I B E R V. 331
Nor are these much better than the heresy
of the *Anthropomorphites*, arisen in the cells and solitude
of stupid Monks: Or the opinion
of Epicurus, corresponding to this very thing in paganism, who
attributed a human form to the Gods. But it was not necessary
for Velleius the Epicurean to ask, *Why did God*
*adorn the Heaven with Stars and Lights, as an Aedile?*
For if that supreme Creator had conducted himself in the manner
of an Aedile, he ought to have arranged the stars into some beautiful
and elegant order, similar to the elaborate ceilings
of palaces; whereas on the contrary one would with difficulty show, in such an
infinite number of stars, any figure either
square, or triangular, or rectilinear.
So great is the discrepancy of harmony between
the spirit of man, and the spirit of the world.
  As for the *Idols of the Cave*, they have their origin
from *each person's own nature, both of mind and*
*body;* and also from *education and custom,*
*and accidental circumstances,* which happen to individual
men. For a most beautiful emblem
is that of *Plato's Cave*. Indeed, if someone
(setting aside the exquisite subtlety of that Parable) from early
infancy, in a dark and subterranean cave or cavern,
were to live until mature age, and then suddenly come out into the open, and
behold this apparatus of heaven and things;
there is no doubt that his mind would be assailed,
and captivated by very many strange, and most absurd
fantasies. But we, of course, live under the aspect
of heaven, yet meanwhile our minds are hidden in the caves
of our bodies; so that infinite
                                     tas

--- Page 354 ---
332          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
finite images of errors and falsehoods must be drawn in, if they emerge from their cave only rarely and for some short time, and do not dwell perpetually in the contemplation of nature, as if under the open sky. Indeed, to that emblem of *Plato's cave* that parable of Heraclitus most aptly applies: *That men seek sciences in their own private worlds, and not in the greater world.*

But the *Idols of the Marketplace* are the most troublesome, which, from a tacit agreement among men, concerning *words and imposed names*, have insinuated themselves into the intellect. Words, however, are for the most part imposed according to the understanding of the common people; and they divide things according to the distinctions of which the common people are capable; but when a sharper intellect, or more diligent observation, wishes to distinguish things better, words obstruct. And what is indeed the remedy for this (definitions, namely) in many cases cannot cure this evil, because definitions themselves consist of words, and words beget words. And although we may think that we command our words; and it is easy to say, '*One should speak as the common people; one should think as the wise.*' Moreover, the terms of the arts (which are valid only among experts) might seem to satisfy this matter; and definitions (of which we have spoken) prefixed to the arts (according to the prudence of Mathematicians) might be able to correct the corrupt acceptations of words, nevertheless, all these things are not sufficient to prevent the deceptions and enchantments of words from misleading in many ways, and from doing a certain violence to the intellect, and from turning their attack (after the manner of Tartar archery) back
in

--- Page 355 ---
LIBER V. 333
into the Intellect (from where they originated). Therefore, a deeper and a new kind of remedy is needed for this Malady. But now we are merely sketching the course, meanwhile declaring this doctrine to be *lacking*, which we shall call *Great Elenchi, or concerning the native and adventitious Idols of the Human Mind*. But its proper treatment we refer to the *Novum Organum*. There still remains a certain notable *Appendix to the Art of Judgment*, which we also deem to be *lacking*. For Aristotle indeed noted the matter, but nowhere pursued its method. It discusses *what kinds of demonstrations ought to be applied to what kinds of matters, or subjects*: so that this doctrine may contain, as it were, judgments *of judgments*. For Aristotle rightly warns that *neither demonstrations should be required from orators, nor persuasions from mathematicians*. So that if one errs in the kind of Proof, the judgment itself may not be absolved. But since there are four kinds of demonstrations, either *by immediate consent and notions*, or *by induction*, or *by Syllogism*, or by that (*which Aristotle rightly calls*) *demonstration in a circle*, (not from the better known, that is, but as it were from a plain,) these individual demonstrations have certain subjects and matters of sciences in which they excel; others, from which they are excluded. For indeed rigor and curiosity, by demanding too severe proofs in some cases, and much more so facility and laxity in acquiescing to lighter proofs in others, are to be numbered among those things which cause very much detriment and impediment

--- Page 356 ---
334    DE AUGM. SCIENT.
detriment and impediment have brought to the sciences. And concerning the *Art of Judging*, let these things have been said.

C H A P. V.

*Division of the Art of Retaining or Retentive Art, into the doctrine concerning aids to memory, and the doctrine concerning Memory itself. Division of the doctrine concerning Memory itself, into Prenotion and Emblem.*

**T**he Art of Retaining, or of Keeping, we shall divide into two doctrines: namely, the *Doctrine* concerning *Aids to Memory*; and the *Doctrine* *of Memory itself*. An aid to Memory is plainly *Writing*; and it must be altogether warned, that *Memory* without this aid is unequal to more extensive and accurate matters; nor should it in any way be received, except from writing. Which also holds especially true in *Inductive Philosophy*, and the *Interpretation of Nature*: For one could as easily complete the calculations of an Ephemeris with bare Memory, without writing, as suffice for the interpretation of Nature through Meditations, and native and bare powers of memory; unless that same memory is supplied by *Ordered Tables*. But leaving aside the *Interpretation of Nature*, which is a new Doctrine, even for the Old and Popular Sciences hardly anything could be more useful than a solid and good aid to Memory; that is, a sound and learned *Digest* of *Commonplaces*. Nor does it escape me, that the arrangement of those things which we read, or learn, into *Commonplaces*,

--- Page 357 ---
L I B E R. V. 335
nes, lest it be imputed by some as a detriment to learning, as that which delays the course of reading, and invites *Memory* to idleness. However, since it is a spurious thing to be precocious and quick in the sciences, unless one is also solid and manifoldly instructed; we judge that diligence and labor in collecting *commonplaces* is altogether a thing of great use and firmness in studies; as that which supplies abundance to *Invention*; and concentrates the keenness of *Judgment* into one. It is true, however, that among the methods and syntaxes of *Commonplaces* which it has so far happened for us to see, none is found which is of any value: inasmuch as in their titles they altogether exhibit a face more of the school than of the World, employing vulgar and pedagogical divisions, but not those which in any way penetrate to the marrow and innermost parts of things.

Concerning *Memory* itself, however, it seems that inquiry has been made quite sluggishly and languidly so far. There certainly exist some things concerning that *Art*: But it is clear to us, that both better precepts concerning the strengthening of *Memory* can be had than that art embraces; and that a better Practice of that very art can be instituted than that which is received. Nor do we doubt, however (if anyone pleases to abuse this art for ostentation), that some marvelous and prodigious things can be performed by it: But nevertheless, the thing is, as it were, sterile (in the way it is applied) for human uses. But we do not, in the meantime, impute to it that it destroys and overburdens *Natural memory* (as is commonly objected), but that

--- Page 358 ---
336 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
but that it has not been skillfully instituted for providing aids to memory in serious business and matters. But we have this habit (perhaps from the nature of our Political life), that we make little of those things which boast of art but offer no use. For to immediately repeat a huge number of names or words once recited in the same order, or to compose several verses extemporaneously on any subject, or to touch upon whatever occurs with some satirical comparison, or to turn everything serious into a joke, or to evade anything by contradiction and caviling, and similar things (of which there is no small abundance in the faculties of the mind, and which can be elevated to a miraculous degree by ingenuity and practice) — all these things and similar ones we certainly do not value more than the agility and tricks of tightrope walkers and mimes. For they are almost the same thing: since the former abuse the powers of the body, the latter those of the mind; and perhaps they have something of admiration, but little of dig-

--- Page 359 ---
L I B E R V. 337
It clearly aids *Memory*. For there underlies a *Prenotion*, that what is sought ought to be such that it agrees with order. Similarly, poems are more easily learned by heart than prose. For if one is stuck on some word, there underlies a *Prenotion*, that the word ought to be such which agrees with the verse. And thus *Prenotion* is the first part of *Artificial Memory*. For in *Artificial Memory* we have *Places* already arranged and prepared; we construct *Images* extemporaneously, as the matter demands. But there underlies a *Prenotion*, that the *Image* ought to be such as in some measure agrees with the *Place*. That which stimulates *Memory*, and in some way fortifies it for the matter which we seek. *Emblem* indeed leads the intellectual to the sensible: but the sensible always strikes *Memory* more strongly, and is more easily impressed upon it, than the intellectual. So much so that even the memory of brutes is excited by the sensible; by the intellectual, not at all. Therefore you would more easily retain the image of a hunter pursuing a hare, or of an apothecary arranging boxes, or of a pedant giving a speech, or of a boy reciting verses by heart, or of a mime acting on stage; than the Notions themselves of Invention, Disposition, Elocution, Memory, Action. There are also other things which pertain to aiding *Memory* (as we just said); but the *Art*, which is now possessed, consists of these two already premised. But to pursue the particular defects of the arts would be to depart from our purpose. Therefore concerning the *Art of Retaining*,

--- Page 360 ---
338      On the Advancement of Learning.
of Retaining, or *Custody*, these things have been said. Now in-
deed, we have come in due course to the fourth member of *Logic*, which treats *Tra-*
*dition* and *Elocution*.

[Decorative floral ornament]

                                        F R A N-

--- Page 361 ---
339

OF FRANCIS BACON
OF VERULAM,
Viscount St. Alban,
*On the Dignity and Advancement*
*of the Sciences,*
BOOK SIX.
*To His King.*
CHAP. I.

*The Division of the Traditional Art, into the Doctrine of the Organ of Discourse;*
*the Doctrine of the Method of Discourse; and the Doctrine of the Illustration*
*of Discourse. The Division of the Doctrine of the Organ of Discourse, into the*
*Doctrine of the Notes of Things; Of Utterance; and Of Writing. Of which*
*the two latter constitute Grammar, and its Divisions are: The Division of the*
*Doctrine of the Notes of Things, into Hieroglyphics, and Real Characters. The*
*Second Division of Grammar, into Literary, and Philosophical. The Aggregation*
*of Poesy, as regards Meter, to the Doctrine of Utterance. The Aggregation of the*
*Doctrine of Ciphers to the Doctrine of Writing.*

[Large decorative initial C] It is certainly granted to anyone (O most excellent King)
to laugh at himself and his own things, and to make sport of them.
Who then knows, whether perhaps the work

--- Page 362 ---
340          ON THE AUGMENTATION OF THE SCIENCES.
is, a *Formicary of the arts*. We, for our part, have indeed gathered a small heap of dust, and beneath it have laid several grains of Sciences and Arts, so that ants may crawl there, and gradually rest, and then gird themselves for new labors. But the wisest of Kings sends all sluggards to the ants: We, however, declare those men to be sluggards whose heart's desire is only to use what has been acquired, and not to make new Sowings and Harvests of the Sciences.
     Let us now approach the *Art of Transmitting*, or of *Bringing forth*, and *Uttering* those things which have been Invented, Judged, and stored in Memory; which we shall call by the general name *Traditive*. It embraces all arts concerning *words* and *discourses*. For although the reason of discourse is, as it were, its soul, nevertheless, in treating it, reason and discourse must be separated; no less than soul and body. We shall divide the *Traditive* into three parts: *Doctrine concerning the Organ of Discourse; Doctrine concerning the Method of Discourse; and Doctrine concerning the Illustration, or Embellishment, of Discourse.*
     The *Doctrine concerning the Organ of Discourse* commonly received, which is also called *Grammar*, is twofold: One *concerning Speaking*, the other *concerning Writing*. For Aristotle rightly said, *Words are the tokens of thoughts, and letters are the tokens of words*. We shall assign both to *Grammar*. But in order to trace the matter more deeply, before we come to *Grammar* and its parts already mentioned, something must be said in general about the *Organ of the Traditive*. For there appear to be certain other offspring of the *Traditive*, besides *Words and Letters*.
                                                                      This

--- Page 363 ---
            BOOK VI.           341
Therefore, this must be plainly established: Whatever
can be divided into sufficiently numerous differences, for
explaining the variety of notions, (provided that those dif-
ferences are perceptible to the senses) can become
a vehicle for thoughts from one person to another.
For we see, Nations differing in *Languages* carry on
commerce not badly through *Gestures*. But in the *Practice*
of some, who had been deaf and mute from *Birth*, and were
otherwise ingenious, we have seen wonderful *Dialogues*
held between them and their friends, who had thoroughly learned
their gestures. Moreover, it has now begun to be very well known,
that in *China*, and the *Provinces* of the farthest *East*,
certain *Real* *Characters* are in use today, not
*Nominal* ones, which, namely, express neither letters nor words, but
things and notions. So that several *Nations*,
entirely differing in languages, but by means of such *Characters* (which

--- Page 364 ---
342           ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
that a certain form of writing was born earlier, and was older than the *Elements of Letters* themselves, unless perhaps among the Hebrews. *Gestures*, however, are like transitory *Hieroglyphics*. For just as spoken words fly away, and written ones remain; so too *Hieroglyphics* expressed by *Gestures* pass away, but those depicted endure. For when Periander, consulted on how to preserve his Tyranny, ordered the Envoy to stand by; and he himself, walking in the garden, plucked the tops of the taller flowers, hinting at the slaughter of the Nobles; he used a *Hieroglyphic* no less than if he had depicted it on paper. Meanwhile, it is clear that *Hieroglyphics* and *Gestures* always have some similarity with the thing signified; and are a kind of *Emblems*; whence we have named them *Notes of Things by Congruity*. But *Real Characters* have nothing of the Emblem, but are completely arbitrary, no less than the very elements of letters, and are formed only by convention, but received by custom, as if by a tacit agreement. Meanwhile, it is clear that a vast multitude of them is necessary for writing: for there must be as many of them as there are root words. This portion, therefore, of the *Doctrine concerning the Organ of Speech*, which is about *Notes of Things*, is set forth by us as a *Desideratum*. And although its use may seem slight, since words and writing by letters are by far the most convenient *Organs of Transmission*; it has nevertheless seemed good to us to make some mention of it in this place, as of a matter not ignoble. For we are treating here, as it were, the coinage of intellectual things. Nor will it be irrelevant to know that, just as coins can be made from

--- Page 365 ---
L I B E R VI. 343
from other material besides gold and silver, so also other Notes of Things can be coined, besides Words and Letters.

Let us proceed therefore to Grammar. It indeed holds, as it were, the place of a wayfarer in relation to other sciences, not indeed a noble one, but nevertheless primarily necessary, especially since sciences, in our age, are drawn mostly from learned languages, not vernacular ones. Nor, however, is its dignity to be considered small, inasmuch as it serves in the place of a certain antidote against that curse of the confusion of tongues. Indeed, human industry does this, that it may restore itself and reintegrate itself into those blessings from which it fell by its own fault. And against the first general curse concerning the barrenness of the earth, "By eating his bread in the sweat of his brow," it fortifies and equips itself with all other arts. But against that second curse concerning the confusion of tongues, it calls Grammar to its aid: Its,

--- Page 366 ---
344      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
and a doubt arose, whether they treated this, which
we call, *Philosophical Grammar*? We suspect, however, that there was nothing very subtle or sublime in them, but that they merely handed down precepts concerning chaste and pure speech, neither corrupted and defiled by a bad custom of speaking, nor by the affectation of some. In which kind he himself excelled. Nevertheless, warned by this very thing, we have conceived in thought *a certain Grammar*, which diligently inquires not into the analogy of words to one another, but into the analogy between words and things, or reason: yet without that Hermeneutics which serves Logic. Words are certainly traces of reason: And so traces also indicate something about the body. Therefore, we will give a certain faint outline of this matter. First, however, we by no means approve of that curious inquiry, which nevertheless Plato, an excellent man, did not despise, namely concerning the imposition and Original Etymology of names, supposing, as if they had not been imposed arbitrarily from the beginning, but derived and deduced by some reason and significantly. Certainly an elegant, and as it were, waxen material, which can be aptly molded and bent; and because it seems to scrutinize the innermost parts of antiquities, also in a certain way venerable; but nevertheless sparingly true, and barren of fruit. That finally, as we think, would be the noblest species of *Grammar*, if someone, excellently learned in very many *languages*, both learned and vulgar, were to treat of the various properties of *languages*; in which each excels, in which—

--- Page 367 ---
L I B E R VI. 345
what each lacks, showing. For thus could *languages* be enriched by mutual exchange; and from those things which are beautiful in individual *Languages* (as *Apelles' Venus*), there will arise a certain most beautiful image of Discourse itself, and a certain distinguished model for rightly expressing the feelings of the mind. And at the same time also in this way, not trivial, but worthy of observation, indications (which perhaps someone would not think) will be gathered concerning the characters and customs of peoples and nations from their own languages. Indeed, I gladly listen to Cicero, noting that among the Greeks there is lacking a word which renders that Latin word (*Ineptum*); *Therefore (he says) because this fault was so familiar to the Greeks that they did not even recognize it in themselves:* Certainly worthy of Roman censorial gravity. What of that, that the Greeks used such great license in the composition of words, while the Romans, on the other hand, employed great severity in this matter

--- Page 368 ---
346      Oɴ Tʜᴇ Aᴜɢᴍ. Oғ Sᴄɪᴇɴᴄᴇ.
their own [system] of conjugations, tenses, and similar things; modern languages, almost devoid of these, accomplish many things sluggishly through prepositions and auxiliary verbs. Indeed, one can easily infer (however much we may please ourselves) that the intellects of previous ages were much sharper and more subtle than ours. There are countless such things that could fill a whole volume. It would therefore not be out of place to distinguish a *Philosophical Grammar* from a *Simple* and *Literary* one, and to establish the *desired* one.
    We also judge that all those things which in any way happen to words pertain to Grammar, such as *sound, measure, accent*. But those first rudiments of simple letters (namely, by what striking of the tongue, by what opening of the mouth, by what bringing together of the lips, by what effort of the throat, the sound of individual letters is generated) do not pertain to Grammar, but are a portion of the *doctrine of sounds*, to be treated under sense and the sensible. The sound, of which we speak, *Grammatical*, pertains only to *Euphonies* and *Dysphonies*. Some of these are common: for there is no *Language* that does not to some extent avoid the hiatus of concurrent vowels, or the harshness of concurrent consonants. There are also others that are relative, which, namely, are pleasing or unpleasing to the ears of different peoples. The *Greek Language* abounds in *Diphthongs*: the *Latin* much more sparingly. The *Spanish Language* hates *Tenues* (voiceless stops), and immediately turns them into *medias* (voiced stops). The *Languages* that flowed from the Goths delight in aspirates: There are many such things. But perhaps these very things are more than enough.
                                                                        At

--- Page 369 ---
LIBER VI. 347
But the measure of words gave birth to us a huge body of art, namely Poetry, not as regards the subject matter (of which we spoke above), but as regards the style and figure of words, namely Verses or Poems. Around which art is considered almost insignificant, yet great and infinite examples abound. Nor, however, should that art (which grammarians call Prosody) be restricted only to teaching the types of poems and their measures: For precepts must be added as to what kind of poem best suits each subject matter. The ancients applied heroic poems to histories and encomiums; elegies to lamentations, iambics to invectives, lyrics to odes and hymns. Nor has this wisdom been lacking in more recent poets in their own languages: that is to be criticized, that some, too fond of antiquity, have tried to transfer Modern Languages to ancient meters (Heroic, Elegiac, Sapphic, etc.), which the very structure of those languages rejects, and which ears no less abhor. In matters of this kind, the judgment of taste should be preferred to the precepts of art, as he says,
__________ I would prefer the dishes of our dinner
To have pleased the guests rather than the cooks.
Nor indeed is it art, but an abuse of art, when it does not perfect nature, but perverts it. But as far as Poetry is concerned, whether we speak of Fables or of Meter, it is, as we said above, like a luxuriant herb, born without seed, germinating from the vigor of the earth itself. Therefore it creeps everywhere, and is most widely diffused, so that it would be superfluous
            Q 4                foret

--- Page 370 ---
348          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
it would be superfluous to be solicitous about its defects. Therefore, that care must be cast aside. But as for the *accents of words*, there is no need to speak of such a trivial matter; unless perhaps someone thinks it worthy of note that the *accents of words* are exquisitely observed, but the *accents of sentences* are by no means observed. Yet that is common to almost the entire human race, that they lower the voice at the end of a period, raise it in a question, and not a few other things of this kind. And concerning that part of *Grammar* which pertains to *Speech*, thus far.

       As for *Writing*, it is accomplished either by the *common Alphabet* (which is everywhere accepted), or by a *secret and private* one, concerning which there is agreement among individuals, which they call *Ciphers*. But *common Orthography* has also brought forth controversy and a question for us: Namely, whether words should be written in the same way...

--- Page 371 ---
L I B E R VI. 349
xa; Wheel cipher, Key cipher, Word cipher, others. But there are three virtues to be sought in Ciphers: That they be expeditious, not too laborious to write: That they be faithful, and in no way open to Deciphering: Finally, I add, that if it can be done, they be free from suspicion. For if letters come into the hands of those who have power over those who write, or to whom they are written, even if the Cipher itself is secure, and impossible to decipher, nevertheless, this matter is subjected to Examination and Question, unless the Cipher is of such a kind that it either is free from suspicion, or eludes examination. But as for eluding examination, a new and useful invention for this purpose is at hand. And since we have this readily available, why should we list it among things desired, and not rather propose it itself? This is of such a kind; that one should have two Alphabets

--- Page 372 ---
350      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
nor has a thing worthy of perishing yet appeared to us.
For it has the highest degree of cipher:
namely, that all things can be signified by all things:
yet so, that the writing which is enveloped may be five times
smaller than that in which it is enveloped: No other
condition or restriction whatsoever is required. This
will be done in this way. First, all the letters of the
_Alphabet_ are to be resolved into only two letters, by
their transposition. For the transposition of two
letters, through five places, with thirty-two differences,
much more twenty-four, (which is the number of our _Alphabet_)
will suffice. An example of this _Alphabet_ is as follows.
      *Example of the Biliteral Alphabet.*
   A          B          C          D          E
*Aaaaa.  aaaab.  aaaba.  aaabb.  aabaa.*
   F          G          H          I          K
*aabab.  aabba.  aabbb.  abaaa.  abaab.*
   L          M          N          O          P
*ababa.  ababb.  abbaa.  abbab.  abbba.*
   Q          R          S          T          V
*abbbb.  baaaa.  baaab.  baaba.  baabb.*
   VV         X          Y          Z
*babaa.  babab.  babba.  babbb.*
      Nor has something trivial been incidentally accomplished
in this way. For indeed, from this very thing, the method
is clear, by which, to every distance of place, through objects
which can be subjected either to sight or to hearing, it is permitted
to bring forth and signify the thoughts of the mind: if only
those objects are capable of only a double difference, as by
bells, by trumpets, by flames, by the sounds of cannons,
and whatever else.

--- Page 373 ---
BOOK VI. 351
whatever. But so that we may pursue our undertaking, when you prepare to write, you will resolve the inner letter into this _Biliteral Alphabet_. Let the inner letter be,
_Example of Resolution._
F V G E
_Aabab. baabb. aabba. aabaa._
Let there also be at hand another _Biform Alphabet_, namely, one which exhibits each letter of the _common Alphabet_, both capital and lowercase, in a double form, as may be convenient for each.
_Example of the Biform Alphabet._
F V G E
_aabab. baabb. aabba. aabaa._
_I want you to stay until I come._
Then finally, to the inner letter, now made _biliteral_, you will letter by letter adapt the _biform_ outer letter, and afterwards transcribe it. Let the outer letter be;
_I want you to stay, until I come._
_Example of Accommodation._
N O P Q
_abbaa. abbab. abbba. abbbb._
R S T V
_baaaa. baaab. baaba. baabb._
W X Y Z
_babaa. babab. babba. babbb._
We have also added another larger example of the same cipher, for writing all things by all things. The inner letter, for which we have chosen the _Spartan Letter_, sent formerly on a _Scytale_.
Q 6 Per-

--- Page 374 ---
352 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
*The situation is lost. Mindarus has fallen. The soldiers are hun-*
*gry. Nor can we extricate ourselves from here, nor can we re-*
*main here any longer.*
*a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b.*
*A. A. a. a. B. B. b. b. C. C. c. c. D. D. d. d.*
*a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b.*
*E. E. e. e. F. F. f. f. G. G. g. g. H. H. h. h.*
*a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b.*
*I. I. i. i. K. K. k. k. L. L. l. l. M. M. m. m.*
*a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b.*
*N. N. n. n. O. O. o. o. P. P. p. p. Q. Q. q. q.*

--- Page 375 ---
L I B E R VI. 353
...lence, and the envy of that Royal Bounty, proves, &c.

The doctrine of ciphers, however, brought with it another doctrine related to itself. That is about Deciphering, or the unlocking of Ciphers: even if one is completely ignorant of the Cipher's Alphabet, or the agreement concerning the secret. That thing is indeed laborious and ingenious at the same time, and dedicated to the secrets of Princes, just like the former. Yet, by diligent precaution, it could be rendered useless; although, as things now stand, it is of very great use. For if the ciphers introduced were good and reliable, there would be many that would completely elude and exclude the Decipherer's effort; which nevertheless would be convenient enough and easy for reading or writing. But the inexperience and ignorance of Secretaries and Amanuenses in the courts of Princes is so great that most affairs are usually entrusted to weak and futile ciphers.

Meanwhile, it is possible that someone may suspect that we, in this enumeration and as it were census of the arts, are acting so that the abundance of sciences (which we bring forth as if into battle array), being increased and multiplied, may be more a cause for admiration; when, however, their number can perhaps only be displayed, and their strengths can hardly be explained in such a brief Treatise. But we faithfully pursue our purpose, and, in completing this globe of sciences, we do not wish even the smaller or more remote islands to be omitted. Nor indeed (as we believe) do we touch upon these arts superficially, though cursorily; but rather their kernels and marrow, from much

--- Page 376 ---
354          ON THE ADV. OF SCI.
from a great mass of material, we extract with a sharp stylus.
We leave the judgment of this matter to those who are most skilled in such arts. For since most who wish to appear learned almost always do this: by casually throwing around the vocabulary and superficialities of the arts, they are an object of admiration to the ignorant, but of ridicule to the Masters; we hope that our work will have the exact opposite outcome, so that it will particularly engage the judgment of the most skilled in each individual art, and be of less account to others.

But as for those arts which can be seen as belonging to lesser peoples, if anyone thinks that we attribute too much to them; let him look around, and he will see that men who are indeed great and famous in their own provinces, when they happen to migrate to the Metropolis or the seat of empire, are almost always mixed in with the crowd and are of inferior note: similarly, it is not surprising that these lighter arts, when placed alongside the Principal and supreme arts, diminish in dignity; although to those who have especially devoted their efforts to them, these things certainly seem great and excellent. And let these things have been said concerning the *organ of speech*.

                                                                      C H A P.

--- Page 377 ---
L I B E R VI.        355

C A P.  I I.

The doctrine of the method of speech is established, as a
substantive and principal part of the traditive art: The name
given to it is "Prudence of the Traditive Art." Diverse
Kinds of Method are enumerated; and their advantages
and disadvantages are subjoined.

Let us come to the doctrine of the method of speech. This
part has customarily been treated in Dialectic. It also
finds a place in Rhetoric under the name of Dis-
position. But its placement in the service of other arts
has been the cause that many things pertaining to it, useful
to know, have been omitted. Therefore, it has seemed good
to us to establish a Substantive and Principal Doctrine
concerning Method, which we call by the general name
"Prudence of the Traditive Art." And so, we shall enumerate
the Kinds of Method (since they are various) rather than
divide them. And concerning the single Method, and perpetual
Dichotomies, it is not worth saying anything: For it was a
certain little cloud of Doctrine, which quickly passed
away: A thing certainly at once trivial and most
damaging to the sciences. For such men, when they
twist things by the laws of their Method; and whatever
does not fit aptly into those Dichotomies, they either
omit or bend contrary to Nature; they bring it about
that, as it were, the Kernels and Grains of the Sciences
escape, while they themselves grasp only dry and deserted
Pods. Therefore, this kind of Method produces empty
shortcuts, and destroys the solid substance of the sciences.
                                     Con-

--- Page 378 ---
356	**On the Advancement of Learning**
	Therefore, let the first distinction of *method* be established, that it is either *magisterial* or *initiative*. Nor indeed do we understand the word *initiative* as if this (method) merely imparted the rudiments of sciences, while that (method imparted) the complete doctrine; But on the contrary (borrowing the term from sacred rites), we call that the *initiative method* which itself reveals and lays bare the mysteries of the sciences. The *magisterial* indeed teaches how to use what is said; but the *initiative* rather, how they may undergo examination: The one imparts sciences to the common run of learners; the other imparts them as if to sons of the sciences: Finally, the one has as its end the use of sciences (as they now are); the other, their continuation and further progress.

Of these, the latter seems a *deserted and blocked* path. For thus have sciences hitherto been accustomed to be taught, as if by agreement, both teacher and learner desiring to embrace errors. For indeed, he who teaches, teaches in such a way that the greatest faith may be given to his words, not in such a way that they may be most conveniently subjected to examination: and he who learns, desires to be made an example for himself, not to await a legitimate inquiry; so that it is dearer to him *Not to doubt, than not to err*. So that both the Master, out of love of glory, takes care not to betray the weakness of his science, and the Disciple, out of hatred of labor, is unwilling to test his own powers.

But science, which is handed down to others as a web to be woven, *must be insinuated into the mind of another by the same Method* (if it can be done) *by which it was first discovered*. And this very thing can certainly be done in science acquired through *induction*; But in anticipated science, that is both premature—

--- Page 379 ---
L I B E R VI. 357

knowledge (which we use), one cannot easily say
by what path one arrived at that knowledge
which one has acquired. Nevertheless, certainly, to a greater or
lesser degree, one can review one's own knowledge,
and retrace the steps of one's cognition, as well as one's assent,
and in this way thus transplant knowledge
into another's mind, just as it grew in
one's own. For the same thing happens to disciplines as to plants:
if you intend to use some plant, it matters not
what happens to the root: but if you wish to transplant it
into another soil, it is safer to use the roots than
the shoots. Thus, tradition (which is now in use)
plainly presents as it were trunks (beautiful ones
indeed) of sciences, but nevertheless without
roots, certainly convenient for a carpenter, but
useless for a planter. But if it is your concern
that disciplines should grow, be less concerned
about the trunks; apply your care to this, that the roots be extracted unharmed, even
with a little adhering earth. Of this kind of tradition
indeed, the *Method of Mathematicians*, in that subject, has a certain
similarity; but generally I do not see what is either
in use, or what anyone has devoted effort to its
inquiry; therefore we will number it among the *things desired*,
and we will call it the *Tradition of the Lamp, or the Method for Sons*.
      There follows another distinction of *Method*, akin to the
former intention, but in reality almost contrary.
For this both *Methods* have in common,
that it separates the common run of hearers from the select.
That opposite, which the former introduces a way

--- Page 380 ---
358          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
mode of Tradition more open than usual; the other, about which we shall now speak, a more hidden one. Let therefore the distinction be such, that one *Method* is *Exoteric*, the other *Acroamatic*. For the difference which the ancients chiefly employed in publishing books, that we shall transfer to the very mode of Tradition. Moreover, the *Acroamatic* itself was in use among the Ancients, and was applied prudently and with judgment. But this *Acroamatic*, or *Enigmatic* kind of discourse, has in later times been disgraced by many, who abused it as an ambiguous and deceptive light, to push out their adulterated wares. Its intention, however, seems to be this: that by the coverings of tradition the common people (the profane, that is) may be kept away from the Secrets of the Sciences; and that only those may be admitted who have either obtained the interpretation of parables through the hands of Masters, or who can penetrate within the veil by their own sharpness and subtlety of intellect.
     There follows another distinction of *Method*, altogether of great importance to the Sciences; namely, when Sciences are handed down either by *Aphorisms* or *Methodically*. For it is especially worthy of note that it has generally become customary for men, from a few axioms and observations, in any given subject, to constitute an art as if complete and solemn, stuffing it with certain Commentaries of their own ingenuity, illustrating it with Examples, and binding it together by *Method*. But that other *Tradition* by *Aphorisms* carries with it many advantages, to which *tradition*

--- Page 381 ---
LIBER VI. 359
which methodical tradition does not reach. For first, it gives a specimen of the Writer, whether he has lightly, and superficially imbibed Science, or has thoroughly absorbed it. For *Aphorisms*, unless they were utterly ridiculous, must necessarily be composed from the marrow, and innermost parts of the Sciences. For illustration, and digression are cut off; variety of examples is cut off; deduction, and connection are cut off; description of Practice is cut off: so that nothing is left for the matter of *Aphorisms*, except a good ample supply of observations. Therefore, no one will be sufficient for *Aphorisms*, indeed, nor will he even think of them, who has not perceived himself to be copiously, and solidly instructed for writing. But in *Methods*

—— *So much does order, and connection avail,*
*So much honor accrues to things taken from the common stock;*

that they often bring back the appearance of some excellent art, I know not what; which, if they were dissolved, separated, and stripped bare, would almost fall back to nothing. Secondly, *Methodical Tradition* is strong for faith and consent; But it less suggests indications concerning Practice: Since it carries before it a certain circular demonstration, with parts illuminating each other, and therefore satisfies the intellect more; but because actions in common life are scattered, not composed in order, therefore even scattered documents are more conducive to them. Lastly, *Aphorisms*, since they exhibit only certain portions, and as it were fragments of the Sciences, invite others also to add something

--- Page 382 ---
360      On the Augmentation of Sciences.
and to spend and contribute; But *Methodical* Tradition, while it displays the entire Science, immediately makes men confident, as if they have already attained the highest point.
   Another distinction of *Method* follows, and that too of great importance: namely, when Sciences are delivered, either by assertions with proofs added, or by questions together with determinations. But if anyone pursues this latter *Method* too immoderately, it hinders the progress of the Sciences no less than it would be an impediment and detriment to the fortunes and progress of some army, if it were to constantly get stuck in conquering every small castle or town. For if one is superior in the field, and diligently applies himself to the main objective of the war, those lesser places will voluntarily submit themselves. However, I would not deny that to leave some large and fortified city behind is by no means always safe: In the same way, refutations in the delivery of Sciences should be moderated, and used sparingly: and only for this purpose, that greater preoccupations of minds and prejudices may be broken, but by no means, that lighter doubts may be excited and provoked.
   Another distinction of *Method* follows, namely, that the *Method* should be suited to the subject matter which is being treated. For *Mathematics* are delivered in one way (which among the Sciences are most abstract and simple); in another way *Politics*, which are most immersed and composite. Nor (as we have already said) can a uniform *Method* conveniently apply itself to multiform matter.

--- Page 383 ---
L I B E R VI. 361
Indeed, just as we have approved *particular Topics* for invention, so we wish *particular Methods* to be similarly applied to teaching to some extent.
   Another distinction of *Method* follows, to be applied with judgment in teaching Sciences. But that is governed by the information and anticipations concerning the Science (which is to be taught) previously instilled and impressed in the minds of the learners. For a Science that comes to the minds of men as entirely new and foreign must be taught differently; differently that which is both related and familiar to opinions long since imbibed and received. And therefore Aristotle, wishing to disparage Democritus, in reality praises him; "If (he says) we wish to dispute seriously, we should not follow resemblances, etc.," turning it into a fault for Democritus that he was excessive in comparisons. But those whose doctrines have already established their seats in popular opinions have nothing else to do but to dispute and prove. For those, on the other hand, whose dogmas transcend popular opinions, a twofold labor is necessary: first, that what they put forward may be understood; then, that it may be proven. So that they are obliged to resort to the aids of similarities and metaphors, by which they may insinuate themselves into the grasp of men. We see therefore, in the infancy of doctrines, in ruder ages, when those Syllepses, which have now become common and trite, were new and unheard of, everything was full of parables and similarities. Otherwise it would have happened that what was proposed, either without being understood,

--- Page 384 ---
362          Oɴ ᴛʜᴇ Aᴜɢᴍ. ᴏғ Sᴄɪᴇɴᴄᴇs.
transmitted without notice, or due attention; or rejected as paradoxes. For it is a certain Rule of the Teaching Method, that every Science which is not *consonant with Anticipations, or presuppositions, ought to seek help from similitudes and comparisons.*
     And let these things be said concerning the different kinds of Methods; namely, those which have not been noted by others before now. For as to those other Methods, the Analytic, the Systematic, the Diaeretic, also the Cryptic, the Homeric, and similar ones, they are rightly invented and distributed; nor does there seem to be a reason why we should dwell on them.
     But the Kinds of Method are of this sort. And there are two parts; One concerns the *disposition of the whole work*, or the argument of some book; The other concerns the *limitation of propositions.* For to Architecture belongs not only the construction of the whole building, but also the shaping and form of columns, beams, and similar things. *Method*, however, is, as it were, the Architecture of the Sciences. And in this respect, Ramus deserved better, in renewing those excellent Rules (καθ' όλου πρῶτον, κατὰ παντὸς, καθ' αὑτὸ, &c.), than in obtruding his single Method and *Dichotomies*. Nevertheless, I know not by what fate it happens that to the most precious human affairs (as poets often feign) are always assigned the most pernicious guardians. Certainly, Ramus's attempt, concerning that refinement of propositions, cast him into those epitomes and shallows of the Sciences. For he must have proceeded under auspicious guidance and the direction of some fortunate Genius, who the Axioms of the Sciences

--- Page 385 ---
LIBER VI. 363
of the sciences to make *convertible*, and did not
at the same time render them *Circular*, or returning into themselves. Nevertheless, we do not deny that Ramus's attempt in this part was useful.
      There remain two more *Limitations of Propositions* besides that they become *Convertible*: One concerning *Extension*; the other concerning their *Production*.
Indeed, *Sciences*, if one rightly observes,
have, besides depth, two other dimensions;
namely, their Latitude and Longitude.
And depth indeed refers to their Truth
and Reality: For these are what confer
solidity. As for the other
two, Latitude can be taken and computed from
Science to Science; but Longitude is taken
from the highest proposition to the lowest in the same
Science. The one embraces the limits and true boundaries of the Sciences, so that propositions are treated properly, not indiscriminately; and all repetition,
digression, and confusion is avoided: The other prescribes the rule, how far and to what degree of particularity the propositions of the Sciences are to be deduced. Indeed, there is no doubt that something must be left to exercise and *Practice*; For it is necessary to avoid the fault of *Antoninus Pius*, lest we be *Cutters of Cumin in the Sciences*; nor multiply divisions to the lowest particulars. Therefore, how we ourselves should moderate in this part, is certainly worthy of inquiry. For we see that overly General things (unless they are deduced) inform little, but rather expose the Sciences to the ridicule of *Practical* men, since they contribute no more to Practice

--- Page 386 ---
364      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
make practical, than Ortelius's Universal Chorography
for showing the way, which leads from Lon-
don to York. Certainly the best Rules are
aptly compared to mirrors made of metal, in
which images are indeed seen, but not before
they have been polished; Thus Rules and Precepts
finally help, after they have undergone the file
of practice. But if, however, right from the begin-
ning, those Rules could be made clear, and as if
crystalline, that would be the best thing to do, since
indeed they would need less assiduous practice.
And concerning the *Science of Method* (which we
have named *Prudence of Traditive*) let these things
have been said.
      Nor, however, should that be omitted, which
some, men more puffed up than learned, have poured
around a certain *Method*, not worthy of the name
of legitimate *Method*, since it is rather a *Method*
of Imposture; which nevertheless was doubtless
most acceptable to certain dabblers. This *Method*
so sprinkles drops of some Science, that some
smatterer can abuse it for ostentation with some
appearance of Erudition. Such was *Lull's Art*,
such *Typocosmia* written by some; which were
nothing else than a mass and heap of words of any
art; to this end, that those who have the words of
the art ready, are thought to have thoroughly learned
the arts themselves. *Collections* of this kind resemble
a junk shop, where many scraps are found, but
nothing that is of any value.

                                          C H A P.

--- Page 387 ---
L I B E R VI. 365

C A P. III.

On the Foundations, & Function of Rhetoric. *Three*
*Appendices of Rhetoric, which pertain only to the*
*Handbook.* Colors of Good & Evil, *both simple,*
*and Comparative:* Antitheses of Things: Minor
Formulas of Oration.

[Large initial V]E come now to the *Doctrine of the Embellishment*
*of Speech.* This is what is called *Rhetoric*,
or *Oratory*. A *science* certainly both excellent in itself,
and excellently cultivated by writers. *Eloquence*,
however, if one truly estimates the matter, is beyond
doubt inferior to *Wisdom*. For we see by how great
an interval the latter leaves the former behind, in the words
with which *God* addressed *Moses*, when he
had refused the task entrusted to him because of a lack of *Elocution*,
"You have Aaron, he will be to you in place of an Orator,
but you to him in place of God." But in effect, and
popular estimation, *Wisdom* yields to *Eloquence*.
For thus *Solomon* says, "The wise in heart will be called
prudent, but the sweet in speech will find greater things."
Not obscurely implying that *Wisdom* procures a certain
fame and admiration for someone: but in managing
affairs, and in common life, *Eloquence* is especially
effective. As for the cultivation of this *Art*;
*Aristotle's Rivalry* towards the *Rhetoricians* of his time,
and *Cicero's* keen and vehement zeal, applying himself
with all his might to ennobling it, combined with long
practice, were the cause that in their books written
about this *Art* they surpassed them-
                                R                      selves.

--- Page 388 ---
366 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
surpassed themselves. Then, those most brilliant *Examples* of this *Art*, which are found in the *Orations of Demosthenes* and *Cicero*, added to the keenness and diligence of the Precepts, doubled its progress. Therefore, what we find to be *lacking* in this *Art* will consist rather in certain *Collections* which may serve this Art as handmaids, than in the Discipline and use of the Art itself. For even then, when we made mention of a certain *Storehouse* in connection with *Logic*, we promised more abundant *Examples* of that matter in *Rhetoric*.

Nevertheless, as is our custom, let us open up and cultivate the soil a little around the roots of this *Art*; *Rhetoric* certainly serves the *Imagination*, just as *Dialectic* serves the *Intellect*. And it is, if one penetrates the matter more deeply, that the *Office and function of Rhetoric* is nothing else than to *apply and commend the dictates of reason to the imagination, to excite the appetite and the will.* For we see the governance of reason assailed and disturbed in three ways: Either by the *entanglement of sophisms*, which pertains to *Dialectic*; or by the *deceptions of words*, which pertains to *Rhetoric*; or by the *violence of the affections*, which pertains to *Ethics*. For just as in affairs which we contract with others, one is accustomed to be overcome and led astray either by *Cunning*, or by *Importunity*, or by *Vehemence*; so also in that internal negotiation which we carry on with ourselves, either we are undermined by the *fallacies of arguments*; or we are troubled and disquieted by the assiduity of *impressions* and *observations*; or we are shaken by the *impetus of the affections*,

--- Page 389 ---
L I B E R VI. 367
we are shaken, and carried away. Nor indeed is human nature dealt with so unhappily, that those arts and faculties should be powerful for overthrowing reason, but by no means for strengthening and establishing it: But for this purpose much more. For the end of *Dialectic* is, to teach the form of arguments, for the defenses of the intellect, not for snares. Likewise the end of *Ethics* is, so to compose the affections, that they may serve reason, and not invade it. Finally, the end of *Rhetoric* is, to fill the Imagination with observations and images, which may bring aid to reason, and not suppress it. For the abuses of art only intervene indirectly, for caution, not for use.

Wherefore in Plato there was the greatest injustice (although arising from a not undeserved hatred towards the *Rhetoricians* of his time) when he placed *Rhetoric* among the voluptuary arts: saying it was similar to *Cookery*, which would no less corrupt wholesome foods, than it would render unwholesome ones more palatable, by abusing the variety of seasonings and delicacies. But far be it, that speech should not more frequently be employed in adorning honest things, than in glossing over base ones: For this is everywhere at hand: Since there is no one, who does not speak more honorably, than he either thinks or acts. Indeed it was very well noted by Thucydides, that something of this kind was accustomed to be objected to Cleon; because, although he always defended the worse side, he was very much engaged in this, to disparage eloquence and the grace of speech. Rightly so, indeed; since he knew, that concerning sordid and unworthy things no one could speak beautifully.

--- Page 390 ---
368          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
who; but about honest things, most easily. Plato elegantly said (though it is already a common saying in the Trivium): *“If virtue were given to be seen, it would excite great loves of itself:”* But *Rhetoric* depicts virtue and the good clearly, and renders them as if visible. For since those things cannot be shown to the senses with a bodily form, it remains that through the adornment of words, they be presented before the Imagination by a representation as vivid as possible. Indeed, the custom of the Stoics was deservedly ridiculed by Cicero; who strove to impose virtue upon the minds of men with concise and acute sentences and conclusions; a method which has little agreement with imagination and will.
     Furthermore, if the affections themselves were compelled into order and were entirely obedient to reason, it is true that there would be no great use for persuasions and insinuations which could provide access to the mind; but it would be enough if the things themselves were presented nakedly and simply, and proven. But affections, on the contrary, make such great secessions; and even stir up such great troubles and seditions (according to that saying:
          ——— *I see the better, and approve it,*
*I follow the worse*) ———
that reason would be entirely carried away into servitude and captivity, unless the Persuasion of Eloquence brought it about that Imagination should not stand on the side of the affections, but rather, by its work, a covenant be entered into between reason and imagination, against the affections. For it must be noted that the affections themselves are always carried towards an apparent good, and in this respect have something
                                                            have

--- Page 391 ---
L I B E R VI. 369
to have in common with reason: but this is the difference; that *Affections look primarily at the good, in the present; Reason looking far ahead, also to the future, and in sum.* And therefore, since what is present fills the Imagination more strongly, reason usually succumbs and is subjugated. But after eloquence and the power of persuasions have brought it about that future and distant things are established and seen as if present, then finally, with the imagination going over to the side of reason, reason becomes superior.
Let us conclude, therefore, that *Rhetoric* ought not to be blamed more for knowing how to adorn the worse part, than *Dialectic* for teaching how to construct Sophisms. For who does not know that the principle of contraries is the same, even if they are opposed in use? Furthermore, *Dialectic* differs from *Rhetoric* not only in that (as is commonly said) the one is like a fist, the other like an open hand; (the one, that is, treats things concisely, the other expansively;) but much more in that *Dialectic* considers reason in its Natural state; *Rhetoric*, as it is situated in the opinions of the common people. Wisely, therefore, Aristotle places *Rhetoric, between Dialectic, and Ethics with Politics*, since it participates in both. Indeed, the proofs and demonstrations of *Dialectic* are common to all people; but the proofs and persuasions of *Rhetoric* ought to vary according to the nature of the audience; so that one, like a Musician adapting himself to different ears, finally becomes
*Orpheus in the woods, Arion among the dolphins.*
R 3 Quæ

--- Page 392 ---
370          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
This application and variation of speech (if one desires its perfection and summit) ought to extend so far that if the very same things are to be said among different people, yet among individuals, different and different words must be used. Although it is certain that the greatest orators are for the most part deficient in this part of eloquence (namely Political and Business-like, in private conversations); while pursuing ornament and elegant forms of speech, they miss that fluent application and characteristics of discourse, which it would be more advisable to use for each individual. Certainly, it would not be amiss, concerning this very thing of which we are now speaking, to institute a new inquiry, and to designate it by the name *Prudence of private discourse*, and to place it among the *Desiderata*: A thing certainly, which the more attentively one considers, the more highly one will value it. Whether indeed this is placed among *Rhetoric* or *Politics*, matters not much.

Let us now descend to the *desiderata* in this *art*, which (as we said before) are of such a kind that they ought to be considered rather as *Appendices* than as portions of the art itself, and all pertain to the *Storehouse*. First therefore we do not find anyone who has well pursued or supplemented that prudence, and at the same time diligence, of Aristotle. He indeed began to collect *popular signs*, or *colors of apparent good and evil, both simple and comparative*, which are truly *Rhetorical Sophisms*. But they are of excellent use, especially for business, and the prudence of private discourse. But the labors of Aristotle concerning these colors in three clau-

--- Page 393 ---
L I B E R VI. 371
Firstly, because although there are many (of them), he enumerates very few. Secondly, because they do not have their Elenchi (refutations) appended. Thirdly, because he seems to have partly ignored their use. For their use serves not so much for proving as for affecting and moving (emotions). Indeed, many forms of speech, which signify the same thing, nevertheless affect differently. For that which is sharpened penetrates much more strongly than that which is blunt; although in the striking itself, the forces are applied equally. Certainly, there is no one who is not more affected hearing, *Your enemies will achieve wondrous triumphs from this;*
*This the Ithacan would wish, and the Atridae would buy it at a great price;*
than if it is simply said, *This will be inconvenient for your affairs.* Therefore, these points and stings of speech are by no means to be neglected. But since we propose this matter as a *Desideratum*, according to our custom, we will support it with *Examples*; for *Precepts* would illustrate the matter less.
*Examples of colors of good and evil, both simple and comparative.*
Sophism.
1. *That which men praise and celebrate, is Good; that which they blame and reprehend, is Evil.*
Elenchus.
The *Sophism* is fallacious in four ways, namely, Either because of ignorance; Or because of bad faith; Or because of biases and factions; Or because of the character of those who praise and blame—
R 4

--- Page 394 ---
372          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
of those who praise and blame. Because of *ignorance*; What is the judgment of the common people for the examination of good and evil? Better Phocion, who, when the people applauded him more than usual, asked, *Had he perhaps committed a fault?* Because of *bad faith*; For those who praise and those who blame often act for their own interest, and do not speak as they think.
    *He praises marketable goods, who wishes to push out his*
        *wares.*
Likewise; *It is bad, it is bad, says the Buyer; but when he has*
*gone away, then he will boast.* Because of *factions*; For it is clear to everyone that men are accustomed to extol with excessive praises those who are of their own party; but to depress below their merit those who are of opposing parties. Because of *dispositions*; For some are by nature made and disposed to servile flattery; Others, on the contrary, are fault-finders and morose; So that in praising and blaming, they only indulge their own dispositions, little concerned with the truth.
        Sophism.
2. *What is praised even by enemies, is a great good; but*
*what is blamed even by friends, is a great evil.*
This Sophism seems to rest on this foundation, that what we say unwillingly and against the affection and inclination of our mind, that very thing is easily believed to extort the force of truth from us.
        Elenchus.
The Sophism is fallacious because of the cunning, both of enemies and of friends. For enemies sometimes bestow praises, not unwillingly, nor by the
        force of truth—

--- Page 395 ---
LIBER VI. 373
compelled by the force of truth, but nevertheless choosing those things which might stir up envy and dangers for their enemies. And so among the Greeks a certain superstition became prevalent, that they believed, if someone were praised by another, with a malevolent mind and the intention of harming, *a pustule was accustomed to grow on his nostrils.* It deceives again, because enemies sometimes bestow praises as certain prefaces, so that afterwards they might calumniate more freely and maliciously. On the other hand, this Sophism also deceives because of the cunning of *Friends*. For they too are accustomed to acknowledge and declare the faults of friends sometimes, not because any force of Truth compels them; but choosing those things which can least harm their friends, as if in other respects they were indeed excellent men. It deceives again, because *Friends* also use their criticisms (just as we said about the praises of *Enemies*) as certain prefaces, so that a little later they may burst forth more effusively into praises.

Sophism,
3. *Whose deprivation is good, that thing itself is Evil; whose deprivation is evil, that thing itself is Good.*
Refutation.
The *Sophism* deceives in two ways: Either because of the *comparison of good and evil:* Or because of the *succession of good to good, or evil to evil.*
Because of *comparison:* If it was good for the human race to be deprived of eating acorns, it does not follow that that thing was evil; but *Dodona* was good, *Ceres* better. Nor if it was bad for the people of Syracuse to be deprived of Dionysius the Elder,
R 5 sequi-

--- Page 396 ---
374         ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
it follows that that Dionysius was good; but
less evil than the Younger. Because of *Succes-*
*sion*: For indeed the privation of some good does not al-
ways give place to evil, but sometimes to a greater
good: as when a flower falls, fruit succeeds.
Nor does the privation of some evil always give place
to good, but sometimes to a greater evil. For with the enemy
Clodius removed, Milo at the same time lost his harvest of
glory.
                Sophism.
  4. *That which is near to good or evil, is likewise*
*good or evil: but that which is removed*
*from good, is evil; that which is removed from evil, is good.*
  This is almost the nature of things, that those which
agree by their nature, also agree in place; but those
which are of contrary nature, are also distant by intervals:
Since each thing rejoices to associate friends with itself, and to
remove enemies.
                Elenchus.
  But the *Sophism* fails in three ways: First, because of *des-*
*titution*, second, because of *obscuration*,
third, because of *protection*. Because of *desti-*
*tution*; It happens that those things which are most ample
in their kind, and most excel, draw all things, as much
as possible, to themselves, and abandon whatever is
placed nearby, and as it were, consume them by starvation.
Therefore, in the vicinity of large trees, you will
never find flourishing saplings. Rightly also that one [said],
*The servants of the rich are most servants*. Nor did he make a bad jest,
who compared the lower retinue in the Courts of Princes
to *vigils of feasts*; which approach their feasts
nearby, but are themselves devoted to fasts.
                                           addi-

--- Page 397 ---
L I B E R V I. 375
are given over. Because of *obscuration*; For indeed, the most
excellent things in their kind have this quality,
that although they do not diminish or destroy nearby
things, yet they obscure and overshadow them. Which
astronomers also note about the Sun, that it is indeed
good to look at, but bad in conjunction and proximity.
Because of *protection*; For not only do
things come together and gather because of
companionship and similarity of nature, but also evil
(especially in civil matters) flees to good, so that it
may lie hidden and be protected. Thus wicked men
seek the Sanctuaries of the Gods, and vice itself takes
refuge in the shadow of virtue;
   *Often vice lies hidden by the proximity of good.*
Conversely, good also associates itself with evil, not
for companionship, but so that it may convert and
reform it into good. Thus, physicians approach
the sick more than the healthy; and it was objected
to our Savior that *He conversed with*
*publicans and sinners.*
          Sophism.
   5. *That to which other parties or sects unanimously*
*yield second place (while each claims the first place for itself)*
*seems better than the rest: For each seems to take first place*
*out of zeal, but to assign second place out of truth and merit.*
   Thus Cicero argues that the sect of the Academics,
which held Acatalepsy, was the most excellent
philosophy. *For ask (he says) a Stoic which sect is*
*superior; he will prefer his own to the others: Then*
*he will admit that the Academic holds second place.*
*Proceed similarly with an Epicurean; (who*
          R 6          Stoics

--- Page 398 ---
376          Oɴ ᴛʜᴇ Aᴜɢᴍ. ᴏғ Sᴄɪᴇɴᴄᴇs.
*Stoic would scarcely tolerate the sight) after he has placed his own*
*Sect at the highest rank, he will place the Acade-*
*mic in the next. Similarly, if some dignity were*
*vacant, if the Prince were to ask each of the com-*
*petitors whom they would especially recommend*
*after themselves, it is probable that their second votes*
*would converge on him who is especially worthy, & has best deserved.*
                    *Elenchus.*
     *The Sophism is fallacious because of Envy. For*
*men are accustomed, immediately after themselves, & their faction,*
*to incline & lean towards those who are the most*
*enervated & unwarlike of the rest, & who*
*have caused them the least trouble, out of ha-*
*tred for those who have most insulted*
*or inconvenienced them.*
                    *Sophism.*
     6. *Whose excellence or superiority is better,*
*that is better in its whole kind.*
     *To this belong those common formulas; Let us not*
*wander in generalities: Let us compare some particu-*
*lar with a particular, etc.*
                    *Elenchus.*
     *This Sophism seems quite vigorous; & some-*
*thing more Dialectical than Rhetorical.*
*Nevertheless, it sometimes deceives. First, because there are not*
*a few things very much subject to danger, which*
*nevertheless, if they succeed, excel others. So that in kind*
*they are worse, because they more often risk &*
*fail; but nobler in the individual. In this*
*number is the March Gem, about which there is a French*
*Adage; "Son of the Parisians, & Gem of the Month*
                                        *of March,"*

--- Page 399 ---
L I B E R V I. 377
*of March, if one of them survives, it will be worth ten others. So much so that in general the May Gem surpasses the March Gem, but nevertheless, in individual cases, the best March Gem is preferred to the best May Gem. It errs secondly; because of the nature of things, which is more equal in some genera or species, and more unequal in others: Just as it is observed that warmer climates generally produce sharper intellects; but in colder ones, those intellects that are outstanding even surpass the sharpest of warmer regions. Similarly, in many armies, if the matter were settled by a duel between individuals, perhaps Victory would go to one side; if with all the forces, to the other. For indeed, excellences and superiorities are subject to chance; but genera are governed by nature or discipline. Moreover, in general, metal is more precious than stone; yet the Diamond surpasses gold.*

*Sophism.*

*7. That which preserves a thing whole, is good; That*
*which is without retreat, is bad: For not being able to retreat*
*is a kind of impotence; but power is good.*

Hence Aesop invented a fable about two
frogs; who, in a great drought, when water was failing everywhere,
deliberated what they should finally do. *The first, however, said:*
*"Let us descend into a deep well, for it is not likely*
*that water will be lacking there." To whom the other thus replied:*
*"But if by chance water also fails there,*
*how shall we be able to ascend again from there?"*

Fir-

--- Page 400 ---
378          On the Advancement of Learning.
The foundation, however, of this sophism is;
That human actions are so uncertain, and
exposed to dangers, that that seems best
which has the most escapes. To this refer those
formulas which are in use, *You will render yourself plainly bound and*
*restricted: You will not take as much as you*
*wish from fortune, etc.*
                              *Refutation.*
  The sophism fails first, because in human
actions fortune urges that something at last be decided.
For as it has been elegantly said by someone;
*Even not to decide, is to decide something:*
So much so that very often the suspension of counsel involves
us in more necessities than if we had
decided something. This seems to be a certain disease
of the mind, similar to that which is found in misers: But
transferred from the desire of retaining wealth; to the desire
of retaining free will and power. Indeed,
the miser does not wish to enjoy, lest anything be subtracted
from the sum; So also a skeptic of this kind wishes to execute nothing,
so that all things may remain whole for him. It fails secondly,
because necessity, and that (which they say) *The die is*
*cast*, adds spurs to minds: as he says:
*Equal to others, you are certainly superior by necessity.*
                              Sophism.
  8. *That which one has contracted by one's own fault, is a greater*
*evil; that which is imposed by external causes, is a lesser evil.*
  The reason for this is, that the bite of conscience
redoubles adversities: On the contrary, to be conscious to
oneself that one is free from fault, offers great
solace in calamity. Therefore poets those
                                                            passions-

--- Page 401 ---
L I B E R. VI. 379
sufferings especially exaggerate, as being closer to
despair, when someone accuses
and torments himself;
   *And he cries that he alone is the cause and head*
      *of evils.*
On the contrary, the consciousness of innocence and merit lightens
and mitigates the calamities of distinguished men. Further-
more, when evil is threatened by others, anyone has
something about which he can freely complain, so that his sorrows
may vent, and not suffocate his heart: For we are
accustomed to be indignant at things that proceed
from the injury of men, or to meditate on revenge, or finally
to implore or await Divine Nemesis:
Moreover, if something has been inflicted by fortune itself,
nevertheless, a certain expostulation with the fates themselves
is granted;
   *And the Mother calls the Gods and the Stars cruel.*
On the contrary, when someone has incurred some evil through his own fault,
the stings of sorrow turn inward, and wound
and pierce the soul more deeply.
               *Refutation.*
   This *Sophism* is false, first because of *hope*;
which is a great antidote to evils. For
the correction of fault is often within our power;
but not at all within the power of Fortune. Therefore, Demosthenes
more than once addressed his citizens with words of this kind;
*What is worst concerning the past, is best concerning*
*the future. What, pray tell, is this? This*
*very thing, namely, that your affairs are in a bad state due to your negligence & fault:*
*For if you had performed your duty in all respects, & nevertheless*
                                             Status

--- Page 402 ---
380 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
*Your state, as it is now, would have suffered, nor would there even be any hope left that it would ever be better. But since your errors have been especially the cause; it must be plainly trusted that you, with those corrected, will recover your former state.* Similarly, Epictetus, speaking about the degrees of tranquility of mind, attributes a low rank to those *who accuse others*; a higher one to those *who accuse themselves*; but the highest to those *who accuse neither others, nor themselves.*
Secondly, it is fallacious because of the pride inherent in human souls; by which men are with difficulty led to acknowledge their own errors. But in order to avoid this, they show far greater patience in those evils which they have contracted by their own fault. For indeed, just as we see it happen, that when a fault has been committed, and the author has not been ascertained, men become excessively enraged and make a commotion: but if afterwards it should come to knowledge, that fault to a son

--- Page 403 ---
**Previous page text for continuity:**
380      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
*your condition, as it now is, had suffered, not even hope*
*would remain that it would ever be better.*
*But since your Errors have been the principal cause; it is to be*
*confidently believed that you, having amended them,*
*will recover your former state.* Similarly, Epictetus, speaking of the degrees of tranquility of mind, attributes an inferior place to those *who accuse others:* a superior one to those *who accuse themselves:* but the supreme one to those *who accuse neither others nor themselves.* It fails secondly, because of the pride inherent in human minds; by which men are reluctantly led to acknowledge their own errors. But to avoid this, they show much greater patience in those evils which they have brought upon themselves by their own fault. For, just as we see it happen, that when a fault has been committed, and the perpetrator is unknown, men become excessively enraged and agitated: but if it afterwards comes to be known, that fault to the son

L I B E R VI. 381
*The degree of inception seems greater than the degree of increment.*
   There is a rule in Mathematics: that there are no ratios of nothing to something. Therefore, the degrees of nullity and quiddity seem greater than the degrees of increment and decrement. Just as it is harder for a one-eyed person to lose one eye than for someone having both eyes [to lose one]. Similarly, for someone having several children, it is more grievous to lose the last son who survived, than the remaining earlier ones. And so Sibyl, when she had burned the two previous books, doubled the price of the third: since the loss of that [book] would have been a degree of *privation*, *not diminution*.
*Refutation.*
   The *Sophism* fails first, because of those things whose use consists in a certain sufficiency, or competence, that is, a determined Quantity. For if someone is penalised to pay a certain sum of money by a certain day; it would be more grievous for him to lack a single gold coin, than if, supposing that single one could not be procured, ten others were also missing. Similarly, in the ruin of fortunes, the degree of indebtedness, which first diminishes the principal, seems more damaging; than the last, which reduces [one] to poverty. To this point refer those common sayings; *Parsimony is late at the bottom [of the barrel]: There is little difference whether you have nothing, or what helps nothing, etc.* It fails secondly, because of that Principle in nature; that *the corruption of one is the generation of another.* So much so that the very degree of ultimate *privation*, sometimes less...

--- Page 404 ---
382 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCES.
while it causes inconvenience; because it offers an opportunity and a stimulus for undertaking some new course of action. Hence also Demosthenes often complains among his citizens; *that the less useful and honorable conditions, which they endured imposed by Philip, were nothing other than certain nourishment for their own idleness and sloth; so that it would have been much better for them to be entirely without them, because in this way their industry could be better sharpened for preparing other remedies.* We certainly know a certain Physician, who, to delicate women complaining that they were ill, but nevertheless abhorred all medicines, used to say, no less wittily than peevishly: *You absolutely need to be worse, so that you may willingly tolerate any medicines, even of any kind. Moreover, the very degree of ultimate privation, or indigence, can be salutary, not only for exciting industry, but also for commanding patience.*

As for the second member of this Sophism; that relies on the same foundation as before (concerning the degrees of quiddity and nullity). Hence such great praises are employed concerning the beginnings of undertakings.
*He who has well begun, has half done, etc.*
Hence the superstition of Astrologers, who make a judgment about a person's disposition or fortune, from the moment or point of birth, or conception.

*Refutation.*
The sophism fails first, because in some

--- Page 405 ---
L I B E R VI. 383
...in some cases the first beginnings of things are nothing other than what Epicurus, in his Philosophy, calls *tentamenta*; that is, certain rudiments, which are nothing unless they are repeated or advanced. Therefore in this case, the second step seems more worthy and more powerful than the first: Just as in wagons, the horse which is second to last contributes more to the movement of the wagon than the first. It is also aptly said; *'A returned insult is that which is guilty of a fight.'* For the former perhaps would have flown past. Therefore *the former gave a beginning to evil, but the latter took away the limit.* The Sophism is fallacious secondly, because of the dignity of perseverance; which lies in progress, not in initial attack. For chance or nature can produce the first impulse; but only mature affection and judgment (produce) constancy. It is fallacious thirdly in those things whose nature and ordinary course are carried contrary to the thing begun. So that the first beginning is perpetually rendered void, unless the forces are continued. Just as it is said in those usual formulas; *'Not to advance, is to retreat: And, He who does not profit, fails:'* As in running uphill; (or) rowing against the current: But on the contrary, if movement begins on the slope of a mountain (downhill); or if rowing is done with the current; then the *initiated step* plays a much more powerful role. Furthermore, that *color* is not only extended to the *degree of inception, which is from potentiality to actuality, compared with the degree which is from actuality to increment:* But also to the *degree which is from Impotence to potency, compared*

--- Page 406 ---
384      Oɴ ᴛʜᴇ Aᴅᴠᴀɴᴄᴇᴍᴇɴᴛ ᴏғ Lᴇᴀʀɴɪɴɢ.
compared with the degree, which is from potential to act.
For indeed, the degree from impotence to potential
seems greater than from potential to act.
Sophism.
10. That which refers to truth is greater
than that which refers to opinion. But the manner and
proof of that which pertains to opinion is this:
that someone, if he thought it would be secret, would not
do it.
Thus the Epicureans declare concerning the happiness of the Stoics,
placed in virtue, that it is similar to the happiness
of an Actor on the Stage; who if he were deprived of the Spectators
and their applause, would immediately collapse in spirit.
And so they call virtue, through ignominy, a theatrical
good. It is otherwise with riches, concerning
which that one [said],
      The people hiss at me; But I applaud myself.
Likewise with Pleasure,
      —— Cherishing pleasing joys deep
      in his heart, with his face feigning
      modesty.
Refutation.
The fallacy of this Sophism is a little more subtle;
although the answer to the example, which is brought
forward, is easy. For virtue is not chosen for
popular favor. Since also that precept is,
That one, most of all, should revere himself.
So that a good man would be the same in solitude,
the same in the theater. Although perhaps virtue is intensified
somewhat by praises, just as heat
is increased by reflection. But this denies the
supposition, it does not refute the fallacy. Refu-
                                                                        -tation

--- Page 407 ---
                      CHAPTER VI.          385
The refutation, however, is as follows. Granted, that virtue (especially that which undergoes labors and conflicts) would not be chosen, unless praises and fame were accustomed to accompany it; it does not therefore follow that the appetite and impulse towards virtue is not primarily for its own sake. Indeed, fame can be merely an impulsive cause, or a *sine qua non* (that without which not), by no means an efficient or constitutive cause. For example: If there were two horses, one of which, without spurs being applied, would perform everything not sluggishly: but the other; with spurs applied, would far surpass the former: That latter one (I believe) would carry off the prize, and would be judged as the better horse. Nor would that saying move anyone of sound judgment; Away with that horse, whose spirit is thirsty for spurs. For since the spur is the ordinary instrument for a rider, and is in no way a burden or hindrance to him; the horse which is spurred on is not therefore to be esteemed less: Nor indeed the other,

--- Page 408 ---
**ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.**

Sophism.
11. *That which is acquired by our own work and virtue is a greater good; that which is bestowed by another's benefit, or by the indulgence of fortune, is a lesser good.*

The reasons for this are these. First, because of *hope for the future*. For indeed, in the favor of others, or in the favorable winds of fortune itself, there is not much certainty; but one's own industry, or virtue, are always at hand. So much so that, after something good has been prepared for us in this way, the same instruments also remain, prepared for new uses, and indeed rendered stronger by habit and success.

Secondly, because that which we acquire *by another's benefit*, of that we are also *debtors to others*; whereas, what we ourselves have acquired, carries no burden with it. Even if divine indulgence has heaped anything upon us, it demands a certain retribution towards God's Goodness. This bites wicked and depraved men, when in the former kind that of the Prophet has come to pass: *They rejoice, and exult, they sacrifice to their traps, and sacrifice to their net.*

Thirdly, because *those things which have not at all proceeded from our virtue, no praise and estimation follow*. For those things which are of fortune, they produce a certain admiration, but by no means praise. As Cicero says to Caesar: *What we may admire, we have; what we may praise, we await.*

Fourthly, because those things which *are acquired by one's own industry*, are almost *joined with labors and struggle*; which has in itself a certain *sweetness*; as Solomon says, *Sweet is food from hunting.*

Elen-

--- Page 409 ---
L I B E R VI.        387
*Elenchus.*

But four opposite arguments are found, which incline the matter to the contrary side; and these can serve as refutations to the former ones. Firstly, because happiness seems to be a certain sign and mark of divine favor; and therefore, it generates both confidence and alacrity in ourselves, and authority and reverence among others. But this happiness also embraces fortuitous things, to which virtue hardly aspires; as when Caesar, encouraging the Ship's Pilot, said: "You carry Caesar, and his fortune." But if he had said, "You carry Caesar, and his virtue," it would have been a completely cold comfort to one in danger in a storm.

Secondly, because those things which proceed from virtue or industry are imitable, and open to others; whereas happiness is an inimitable thing, and a certain prerogative of an individual person. Therefore, in general, we see natural things preferred to artificial ones, because they do not admit imitation. For what is imitable is potentially vulgarized.

Thirdly, those things which arise from happiness seem to be gratuitous goods, not bought by labors; but those which are from one's own virtue are as if acquired at a price. Therefore, Plutarch elegantly, when comparing the affairs of Timoleon, a man by far the most fortunate, with the affairs of Agesilaus and Epaminondas, who lived in the same age, said: that those were like Homer's poems, which, while they excel in other ways, also seem to flow spontaneously, and as it were, taste of genius.

Fourthly, because what happens beyond hope or beyond expectation is more pleasing, and with greater...

--- Page 410 ---
388      Oɴ ᴛʜᴇ Aᴅᴠᴀɴᴄᴇᴍᴇɴᴛ ᴏғ Lᴇᴀʀɴɪɴɢ
*with greater pleasure flows into the minds of men. But that by no means applies to those things which are acquired by one's own care and ambition.*
               Sophism.
   12. *That which consists of many and divisible parts is greater than that which consists of fewer and is more unified: For all things considered part by part seem greater: Therefore, a plurality of parts also presents magnitude: But a plurality of parts operates more strongly if order is absent: For it induces a likeness of the infinite, and hinders comprehension.*
   This sophism seems fallacious even at first glance, and as it were palpable: Indeed, not merely a plurality of parts, but their greater size, will be able to constitute a larger whole. Nevertheless, this very sophism often carries away the imagination; indeed, it even ensnares the senses. For to the sight, a path seems shorter on a plain where nothing intervenes to break the view, than in such a stretch of land where trees, or buildings, or some other sign that can measure and divide the space are simultaneously seen. Thus, for a wealthy person, after he has divided and arranged his chests and purses, a greater imagination of wealth comes to him than before. It also has power in amplifications, if a thing is divided into more portions, and each is treated separately. But this fills the imagination even more if it is done indiscriminately and without order. For the confusion of multitude generates opinion. Indeed, those things which are shown in order, or are proposed...

--- Page 411 ---
L I B E R. VI. 389
...presented in order, then they themselves appear more finite, and then they provide a certain argument that nothing has been omitted. But on the contrary, things that are represented confusedly are not only thought to be numerous in themselves, but also leave room for the suspicion that there are still more things remaining which are omitted.

_Elenchus._

_The Sophism Fails._ Firstly, when someone has conceived a more amplified opinion about something than corresponds to the true magnitude of the thing itself. For when this is the case, distribution will destroy that false opinion, and will show the thing in its truth, not with amplification. Therefore, if someone is seized by illness or pain, the hours will seem longer to them without a clock or water-clock, than if they are measured by these. For if the weariness and vexation of illness make time seem longer than it truly is, yet the computation of time corrects that error, and makes it shorter than that false opinion had conceived. Also on a plain, contrary to what was said above, it sometimes happens. For although sight at first shows the way to be shorter to the sense, because it is undivided: yet if from this an opinion creeps in about a much smaller interval than is found: the frustration of that vain opinion will cause it to appear in the end even longer than it truly is. Therefore, if someone wishes to support someone's false opinion about the magnitude of something, let him beware of distributions, but by all means extol the thing as a whole. _The Sophism Fails_ secondly, if that distribution is drawn out, and not presented simultaneously, or in a single
S glance

--- Page 412 ---
390          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
or strikes the sight in one aspect. Therefore, if flowers in some garden are divided into several beds, they will present the appearance of a greater quantity than if all grew together in one bed; Provided that those beds are simultaneously subjected to the eyes; For otherwise, unity will prevail over distracted distribution. Thus, the incomes of those seem greater for whom their estates and large landholdings are neighboring or conjoined. For if they are situated scattered, they do not come so easily into view. Thirdly, the Sophism is misleading, because of the dignity of unity, above multitude. For every composition is a most certain sign of want in the individual parts; where that applies:

    *And what are not useful individually, are useful in multitude.*

Therefore, Mary's part is better; *Martha, Martha, you are anxious about many things, one thing is sufficient.* Hence that fable of Aesop about the fox and the cat: for the fox boasted how many tricks and escapes it had, by which it might save itself from dogs; But the cat said that it trusted in only one aid, inasmuch as it had the simple ability to climb. Which, however, was a far more excellent defense than those other foxy ones: whence the Adage; *The fox knows many things, but the cat knows one great thing.* Moreover, the same is perceived in the moral meaning of this fable: For to rely on a powerful and faithful friend has more protection than very many tricks and cunning devices.

    And these will suffice by way of example. But there remains for us a number of such *colors* also grea-

--- Page 413 ---
LIBER VI. 391
large, which we once gathered as young men:
but without their illustrations, and *Elenchi*; which we do not have time to prepare at this moment: and therefore to propose those bare colors, without their illustrations (since those above appear clothed), seems by no means agreeable to us. Meanwhile, we warn that this matter, whatever it may seem, is, in our judgment, of no small value: inasmuch as it partakes of *First Philosophy* and *Rhetoric*. And concerning *popular signs, or colors of apparent good and evil, both simple and comparative*, so much for now.

The second *Collection, which pertains to a storehouse and is desired*, is that which Cicero (as we said above in *Logic*) hints at; when he prescribes that *Commonplaces* be held in readiness, debated and treated on both sides. Such are, *For the words of the law* and *For the spirit of the law*, etc. We, however, extend this precept also to other matters; so that it may be applied not only to the judicial genre, but also to the deliberative and demonstrative. In short, we wish that all *Commonplaces*, of which there is frequent use (whether they pertain to proofs and refutations, or to persuasions and dissuasions, or to praises and censures), should already be meditated upon, and that they should be raised and lowered with the utmost powers of intellect, and as if improperly, and entirely contrary to truth. We deem the best method for this

--- Page 414 ---
392 D E A U G M. S C I E N T.
into certain acute and concise sentences; as it were certain balls of yarn, whose threads can be unwound into a more expansive discourse, when the matter demands it. And we find a similar diligence in Seneca, but in hypotheses or cases. Since we have many prepared of this kind, it seemed good to propose some as examples. These we call *Antitheses of Things*.

Examples of *Antitheses*.

NOBILITY. I.

For.

[Large initial Q] *To whom virtue is deeply ingrained by birth;*
*they now not only do not wish to be evil, but cannot.*
*Nobility is a laurel wreath, with which time crowns men.*
*We venerate antiquity even in dead monuments; how much more in living ones?*
*If you despise the nobility of families, what*
*difference, then, will there be between the offspring of men,*
*and of beasts?*
*Nobility withdraws virtue from envy, and delivers it to favor.*

Contra.

--- Page 415 ---
L I B E R VI. 393

Contra.
**R**arely does Nobility come from virtue, more rarely does Virtue come from Nobility.
Nobles more often use the entreaty of their ancestors for pardon, than their influence for honors.
So great is usually the industry of new men, that Nobles appear like statues compared to them.
Nobles look back too often in the race-course; which is characteristic of a bad runner.

Forma. II.
Pro.
Deformed people are accustomed to avenge nature.
And Virtue is nothing else than inner beauty; and beauty is nothing else than outer virtue.
Deformed people desire to vindicate themselves from contempt, certainly through their own malice.
Beauty makes virtues shine, and vices blush.

Conrra.
Virtue, like a noble gem, is better set without much gold and ornamentation.
What fine clothing is to a deformed person, this beauty is to a wicked person.
Similarly, for the most part, those whom beauty adorns, and whom it moves, are light-minded.

Juventus. III.
Pro.
First thoughts, and the counsels of young people, have more from the Divine.

S 3 Senes

--- Page 416 ---
**On the Augmentation of Sciences.**
  Old people are wiser for themselves; for others, and for the Commonwealth, less so.
  If it could be seen, old age disfigures minds more than bodies.
  Old people fear all things, except the Gods.
                    **Contra.**
  Youth is a field for repentance.
  Contempt for the authority of old age is innate in young people: so that each may be wise at his own peril.
  Time does not ratify counsels to which it is not invited.
  For old people, charms are changed into graces.
               **Health. IV.**
                      **Pro.**
  Care of health makes the mind humble, and a supplicant to the body.
  A healthy body is a guest of the soul; a sick one, a jailer.
  Nothing promotes the highest actions so much as good health: but on the contrary, a weak one is too much afflicted.
                    **Contra.**
  To often recover, is to often grow young again.
  The excuse of health is multi-purpose; to which even healthy people resort.
  Health joins the body to the soul with too tight a bond.
  Both the bed has administered great empires, and the litter great armies.
               **Wife & Children. V.**
                      **Pro.**
  Love for the Commonwealth begins with the family.
                                                                    Wife

--- Page 417 ---
L I B E R VI. 395
Wife and Children [are formed] by a certain discipline of humanity, but bachelors are gloomy and severe.
  Celibacy and childlessness contribute to nothing else than to flight.
  He sacrifices to Mars who does not beget children.
  Those who are happy in other things are almost unfortunate in children: lest men approach too closely to Divine Fortune.
            Contra.
  He who has taken a wife and begotten children has given hostages to fortune.
  To beget, and children, are human; to create, and works, are Divine.
  The eternity of brutes is offspring; of men, fame, merits, and institutions.
  Economic considerations for the most part overthrow public ones.
  To some, the fortune of Priam was pleasing, who survived all his own.
        Riches. VI.
            Pro.
  They despise riches who despair.
  The envy of riches made virtue a goddess.
  While philosophers doubt whether all things are to be referred to virtue or to pleasure, gather the instruments of both.
  Virtue through riches is turned into common good.
  Other goods have a provincial administration; riches alone a general one.

        S 4 Con-

--- Page 418 ---
396          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
                    Contra.
  Of great riches there is either custody, or a
certain management, or fame, but no use.
  Do you not see that for little stones, and delights
of that kind, prices are feigned, so that there might
be some use of great riches?
  Many, while they believed that all things would
be for sale with their riches, they themselves were
sold first.
  I would call riches nothing else than hindrances
to virtue. For to virtue they are both necessary
and burdensome.
  Riches are a good handmaid, a very bad mistress.
                 Honors. VII.
                      Pro.
  Honors are not of tyrants (as they say), but are
the decrees of Divine Providence.
  Honors make both virtues and vices conspicuous:
Therefore they provoke the former, and restrain the
latter.
  No one knows how much he has advanced in the
course of virtue, unless honors offer him an open
field.
  Of virtue, as of other things, the movement is
rapid towards its place, peaceful in its place: But
the place of virtue is honor.
                    Contra.
  While we seek honors, we strip off liberty.
  Honors almost always give power over those
things which the best condition is to not want, the
next best is not to be able to do.
  The ascent of honors is arduous, the standing is
slippery, the retreat is headlong.
                                          Who

--- Page 419 ---
            BOOK VI.            397
  Those who are in honor must borrow the opinion of the common people, so that they may consider themselves blessed.
            Governments.  VIII.
                 For.
  To enjoy happiness is a great good, but to be able to impart it to others as well, is still greater.
  Kings are not like men, but like stars. For both upon individuals and upon times themselves, they have a great influence.
  To resist those who act as God's representatives is not only a crime of *lèse-majesté*, but a kind of Theomachy.
                Against.
  How miserable it is to have almost nothing that you desire, and infinite things that you fear.
  Those who are in power are like Celestial Bodies, which have great veneration, but no rest.
  No one of human lot is admitted to the banquets of the Gods, except for mockery.
      Praise. Reputation.  IX.
                 For.
  Praises are the reflected rays of virtue.
  Praise is an honor, to which one arrives by free votes.
  Honors are conferred by different polities, but praises everywhere are of liberty.
  The voice of the people has something Divine. For how else could so many heads conspire into one?
  Do not wonder if the common people speak more truly than the more honored ones: because they also speak more safely.
                 S 5           Against.

--- Page 420 ---
398      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF KNOWLEDGE.
            Against.
Fame is a worse judge than a messenger.
What has a good man to do with the spittle of the common people?
Fame, like a river, lifts up light things, and submerges solid things.
  Among the common people, there is praise for the lowest virtues, admiration for the middle, and no perception of the highest.
  Praise comes more from ostentation than from merit: and it accrues more to the empty than to the substantial.
            Nature. X.
               For.
  The progress of custom is arithmetical, that of Nature is geometrical.
  As common laws relate to customs in states, so in individuals does Nature relate to Custom.
  Custom against nature is a kind of tyranny: and it quickly collapses on a slight occasion.
            Against.
  We think according to nature, we speak according to precepts: but we act according to custom.
  Nature is a kind of pedant, Custom a magistrate.
            Fortune. XI.
               For.
  Open virtues bring forth praises, hidden ones fortunes.
  Virtues of offices bring forth praises: those of abilities, fortunes.
                                       For-

--- Page 421 ---
LIBER VI. 399
*Fortune, like a galaxy, that is, a knot of certain*
*obscure virtues, without a Name.*
*Fortune at least is to be honored on account of her daughters, namely,*
*confidence and authority.*

Contra.
*The folly of one, the fortune of another.*
*In Fortune, I would especially praise this, that*
*since she does not choose, she does not protect.*
*Great Men, while they avoided the envy of their*
*virtues, were found among the cultivators of fortune.*

Life. XII.
Pro.
*It is absurd to love the Accidents of Life more*
*than life itself.*
*For all things, even for virtue, a long course is better*
*than a short one.*
*Without greater spans of life, it is neither given to perfect,*
*nor to learn thoroughly, nor to repent.*

Contra.
*Philosophers, while they gather such great preparation against*
*death, made it itself more to be feared.*
*Men fear death because they do not know it, as*
*children (fear) the darkness.*
*You would not find among human affections one so small,*
*which, if it is intensified a little more vehemently,*
*would not overcome the fear of death.*
*To wish to die, not only a brave, or wretched, or*
*wise man, but also a fastidious man can (do so).*
S. 6 Super-

--- Page 422 ---
400      On the Advancement of Learning.
          Superstition. XIII.
                    Pro.
  *Those who sin from zeal are not to be approved, but nevertheless*
*are to be loved.*
  *Moderate qualities belong to morals: extremes*
*to divine things.*
  *A superstitious person is a designated religious person.*
  *I would sooner believe all the most fabulous portents of any*
*religion, than that all these things happen without a*
*Divine Power.*
                   Contra.
  *As in an ape, its resemblance to man adds to its deformity:*
*so to Superstition, its resemblance to*
*Religion.*
  *Such as is the hatred of affectation in civil matters, such*
*is that of superstition in divine matters.*
  *It is better to have no opinion about the Gods,*
*than a contemptuous one.*
  *Not the School of Epicurus, but the Stoa, disturbed the ancient*
*Republics.*
  *It does not fall into the human mind to be a mere*
*Atheist by dogma: but great Hypocrites are*
*the true Atheists: who perpetually handle sacred things,*
*but never revere them.*
          Pride. XIV.
                    Pro.
  *Pride is even incompatible with vices: and as*
*poison by poison, so not a few vices are driven out by pride.*
  *The easy-going person is even beholden to others: the proud person,*
*only to his own.*
  *Pride, if from the contempt of others to that of one's*
                                        own...

--- Page 423 ---
L I B E R V I. 401
ascends to self-contempt, it will at last become Philosophy.
Against.
Pride is the ivy of all virtues and good things.
Other vices are only contrary to virtues:
Pride alone is contagious.
Pride lacks the best condition of vices, that is, secrecy.
The proud man, when he despises others, meanwhile neglects himself.
Ingratitude. XV.
For.
The crime of an ungrateful mind is nothing else than a certain shrewdness into the cause of the benefit conferred.
While we wish to be grateful towards some, we neither render Justice to others nor Liberty to ourselves.
Gratitude for a benefit is all the less to be returned, because its price is not fixed.
Against.
The crime of an ungrateful mind is not restrained by punishments, but is left to the Furies.
The bonds of benefits are tighter than those of duties; therefore, he who is ungrateful is also unjust, and all that implies.
Such is the human condition: No one is born of such public fortune that he does not owe himself entirely to private Favor and Revenge.
Envy. XVI.
For.
It is natural to hate the reproach of one's fortune.
Envy-

--- Page 424 ---
402      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
*Envy in the Commonwealth is like a salutary ostra-*
*cism.*
Against.
*Envy keeps no holidays.*
*No one will reconcile envy to virtue except*
*death.*
*Envy exercises virtues with labors, as Juno*
*did Hercules.*
Impudicity. XVII.
For.
*Jealousy is due; because chastity has been made a vir-*
*tue.*
*Much sadness is needed for anyone to consider Venus a serious mat-*
*ter.*
*Why do you place either a part of diet, or a kind of cleanli-*
*ness, or a daughter of pride, among the virtues?*
*Of loves, as of wild birds, there is no owner-*
*ship, but the right is transferred by possession.*
Against.
*Impudicity is the worst transformation of Circe.*
*The unchaste person has utterly lost self-respect:*
*which is the bridle of all vices.*
*All, like Paris, who make a choice of beauty,*
*suffer the loss of prudence and power.*
*Alexander hit upon an uncommon truth:*
*when he said Sleep and Venus were the pledges of Death.*
Cruelty. XVIII.
For.
*No one of the virtues is so often guilty as Cle-*
*mency.*
Cru-

--- Page 425 ---
L I B E R V I. 403
  Cruelty, if it is from vengeance, is Justice: if from
danger, prudence.
  He who bestows Mercy on an enemy, denies it to
himself.
  Bloodlettings are not more often necessary in
treatments, than slaughters in civil affairs.
                Against.
  To run riot with slaughters is either of a Beast, or of a Fury.
  Cruelty always seems fabulous to a good man, and a Tragic fiction.
        Vain Glory. X I X.
                 For.
  He who seeks his own praises, at the same time seeks
the advantages of others.
  He who is so sober as to care for nothing belonging to others,
I fear he may also consider public affairs as not his own.
  Minds in which there is something empty, more easily
undertake the care of the Republic.
                Against.
  The vain-glorious are always factious, liars, fickle,
excessive.
  Thraso, the prey of Gnatho.
  It is shameful for a suitor to solicit a maidservant: but
Praise is the handmaid of virtue.
          Justice. X X.
                 For.
  Commands

--- Page 426 ---
404      On the Advancement of Learning.
Contra.
  *If this is to be just: not to do to another what you would not wish to be done to you, then Clemency is ultimately Justice.*
  *If everyone is to be given what is his due, certainly also pardon to humanity.*
  *Why do you tell me about equity, when to the wise man all things are unequal?*
  *Consider what the condition of the accused was among the Romans, and declare that Justice is not in the Republic.*
  *That common Justice of states is a Philosopher in court: that is, it serves only for the reverence of rulers.*
Fortitude. XXI.
Pro.
  *Nothing is terrible except fear itself.*
  *Nothing is solid in pleasure, or fortified in virtue, where fear assails.*
  *He who looks at dangers with open eyes, to face them, also notices how to avoid them.*
  *Other virtues free us from the dominion of vices, fortitude alone from the dominion of fortune.*
Contra.
  *A splendid virtue it is to wish to perish, so that you may destroy.*
  *A splendid virtue which even drunkenness induces.*
  *Prodigal of his own life, dangerous to another's.*
  *Fortitude is the virtue of the iron age.*
Temperance. XXII.
Pro.
  *Nearly the same power of abstaining and enduring.*
Uni-

--- Page 427 ---
L I B E R VI.. 405
Uniformities, harmony, and measure of movements are heavenly, and characteristics of eternity.
Temperance, like wholesome cold, gathers and strengthens the mind's powers.
Refined and erratic senses need narcotics: similarly also emotions.
          Contra.
These negative virtues are not pleasing: for they provide innocence, not merits.
The mind that lacks excesses languishes.
I love virtues which induce excellence of action, not dullness of passion.
When you posit harmonious movements of the mind, you posit few: For it is characteristic of a poor man to count his cattle.
These things (not to use, so that you do not desire: Not to desire, so that you do not fear) are characteristic of a faint-hearted and distrustful person.
      Constancy. XXIII.
          Pro.
Constancy is the basis of virtues.
Wretched is he who does not know what kind of person he himself will be.
The weakness of human judgment cannot be consistent with reality itself: therefore let it at least be consistent with itself.
Constancy lends dignity even to vices.
If to the inconstancy of fortune is added also the inconstancy of the mind, in what great darkness does one live?
Fortune, like Proteus, if you persevere, returns to its form.

          Con-

--- Page 428 ---
406          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
                    Contra.
  *Constancy, like a grumpy doorkeeper, drives away many useful judgments.*
  *It is fair that constancy tolerates adverse things well; for it nearly brings them about.*
  *The shortest folly is the best.*
          Magnanimity.  XXIV.
                     Pro.
  *If the soul once desires noble ends, immediately not only do virtues surround it, but also divine powers.*
  *Virtues from habit, or precepts, are common; from their end, they are Heroic.*
                    Contra.
  *Magnanimity is a poetic virtue.*
    Knowledge.  Contemplation.  XXV.
                     Pro.
  *That indeed is pleasure according to Nature, of which there is no satiety.*
  *The sweetest prospect is into the underlying errors of others.*
  *How good it is to have the spheres of the mind concentric with the universe?*
  *All evil affections are false estimations: and goodness and truth are the same.*
                    Contra.
  *Contemplation, a specious idleness.*
  *To think well is not much better than to dream well.*
  *The Divine Power cares for the world, you for your homeland.*
  *The statesman also strikes down contemplations.*

                                          Letters.

--- Page 429 ---
LIBER VI. 407
Learning. XXVI.
Pro.
If books were written about trivial matters, there would scarcely be any use for experience.
Reading is conversation with the wise; action is almost always with fools.
Sciences are not to be considered useless, even those which have no use in themselves, if they sharpen and order the intellect.
Contra.
In Academies they learn to believe.
What art ever taught the timely use of art?
To be wise by rule and by experience are plainly contrary methods: so that he who is accustomed to the one is inept for the other.
The use of art is very often inept, lest there be no use at all.
Almost all Academics have this, that from any matter they are accustomed to recognize what they already do, and not to learn what they do not know.
Promptness. XXVII.
Pro.
Prudence is not opportune if it is not swift.
He who errs quickly, quickly corrects the error.
He who is prudent by design and not incidentally, achieves nothing great.
Contra.
Prudence which is readily available is not profound.
Prudence, like a garment, is superficial if it is too quick.
Deliberation does not mature the counsels of one whose prudence is not matured by age.
What

--- Page 430 ---
408      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
*What is devised for a short time, pleases for a short*
*time.*
Silence in Secrets. XXVIII.
Pro.
*Nothing is kept back from a silent person, because all things are safely com-*
*municated.*
*He who easily speaks what he knows, also speaks what he*
*does not know.*
*Even mysteries are due to secrets.*
Contra.
*Variety of manners best disposes the mind to*
*secrecy.*
*Silence is the virtue of a confessor.*
*All things are kept back from a silent person, because silence*
*is repaid.*
*A reserved person is akin to a stranger.*
Easiness. XXIX.
Pro.
*I love a man susceptible to another's emotion, but never-*
*theless withdrawing his judgment from compliance.*
*To be flexible, approaches most closely the nature of*
*gold.*
Contra.
*Easiness is a certain inept deprivation of judgment.*
*The benefits of easy people seem due; their denials,*
*an injury.*
*He feels a sense of satisfaction who obtains some-*
*thing from an easy person.*
*All difficulties press upon an easy person; for*
*he entangles himself in all of them.*
*An easy person almost always withdraws with shame.*

Popu-

--- Page 431 ---
L I B E R VI. 409
BOOK VI. 409

Popularitas. XXX.
Popularity. XXX.

Pro.
For.

Almost the same things please the wise; but to accommodate the variety of fools is wisdom.
To cultivate the people is to be cultivated.
Those who are themselves great men almost fear no single person, but the people.

Contra.
Against.

He who greatly associates with fools can himself be suspected.
He who pleases the crowd almost also stirs up troubles.
Nothing moderate is pleasing to the common people.
The lowest flattery is the flattery of the common people.

Loquacitas. XXXI.
Loquacity. XXXI.

Pro.
For.

He who is silent either holds others as suspected, or is himself suspected by himself.
All restraint makes unhappy; the most miserable is that of silence.
Silence is the virtue of fools: Therefore they rightly are silent. If you are wise, you are foolish; if foolish, wise.
Silence, like night, is opportune for ambushes.
Thoughts are most healthy when flowing forth.
Silence is a kind of solitude. He who is silent sells himself to opinion. Silence neither expels evil thoughts nor distributes good ones.

Contra.
Against.

Silence adds both grace and authority to words.
Silence, like a kind of sleep, nourishes prudence.
Si-

--- Page 432 ---
410          On the Advancement of Learning.
Silence is the fermentation of thoughts.
Silence is the style of prudence.
Silence embraces truth.
          Dissimulation. XXXII.
                    Pro.
Dissimulation is expedient wisdom.
We ought not to say the same thing, but to aim at the same thing.
Even in the mind, nakedness is unseemly.
Dissimulation is both for decorum and for protection.
Dissimulation is the fence of counsels.
Some are deceived by their own good.
He who does everything without dissimulation is equally foolish: for most people either take advantage, or do not believe.
Lack of dissimulation is nothing else than weakness of mind.
                    Contra.
Since we cannot think according to the truth of things, at least let us speak according to our thought.
For those for whom civil arts are beyond the grasp of their intellect, dissimulation will serve as prudence.
He who dissimulates deprives himself of the chief instrument for action, namely Trust.
Dissimulation invites dissimulation.
He who dissimulates is not free.
          Audacity. XXXIII.
                    Pro.
He who is modest teaches disapproval.
What delivery is to an orator, that is audacity to a civil man: first, second, third.
                                                  Confi-

--- Page 433 ---
L I B E R VI. 411

*I love modesty that confesses, I hate modesty that accuses.*
*Confidence in manners more readily unites minds.*
*A reserved countenance and clear speech are pleasing.*
Contra.
*Audacity is the path of folly.*
*Shamelessness is useless, unless for imposture.*
*Confidence is the empress of fools, the jester of the prudent.*
*Audacity is a kind of dullness of perception, combined with malice of will.*
Ceremonies. Formalities. Affectation.
XXXIV.
Pro.
*A seemly moderation of countenance and gesture is the true seasoning of virtue.*
*If we conform to common usage in words, why not also in dress and gestures?*
*He who does not maintain decorum in trivial matters and daily custom, though he be a great man, know nevertheless that he is wise only at certain hours.*
*Virtue and prudence without formalities are like a foreign language; for they are not understood by the common people.*
*He who does not know the common people's understanding through appropriateness, if he does not know it even through observation, is the most foolish of all.*
*Formalities are a translation of virtue into the vernacular language.*
Contra.
*What is more unseemly than to transfer the stage into life?*
Ex

--- Page 434 ---
412 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
From ingenuousness, grace; from artifice, dislike.
Cheeks whitened with ceruse and hair curled
with a curling iron are more pleasing than whitened
and curled manners.
He who applies his mind to such trivial observations
is not capable of great thought.
The Affectation of Ingenuousness, a glittering rottenness.

Jests. XXXV.
Pro.
A jest is the altar of orators.
He who mixes a modest charm into everything
retains freedom of spirit.
It is a matter of statecraft, more than one might think, to easily pass
from jest to seriousness, and from seriousness to jest.
A jest is often the vehicle of truth, which would
otherwise not reach its destination.
Contra.
Who would not despise those hunters of deformities
and niceties?
To diminish the greatness of things with a jest is a wicked
artifice.
Consider jests then, when they are devoid of laughter.
Witty remarks almost never penetrate beyond the surface
of things, where the dwelling of jest is.
Where a jest has any importance for serious matters,
there is childish frivolity.

Love. XXXVI.
Pro.
Do you not see that all seek themselves? But only
the lover finds himself.
There is no better ordering of the mind than from the
sway of some notable affection.
Who

--- Page 435 ---
L I B E R VI. 413
*He who is wise, let him seek Desire: for he who does not*
*eagerly desire something, to him all things are unpleasant,*
*and full of weariness.*
*Why should not the One find contentment in Unity?*
Contra.
*The stage owes much to Love, Life nothing.*
*Nothing is of such varied name as love: For the*
*thing is either so foolish that it does not know itself, or so base,*
*that it hides itself with pretense.*
*I hate those single-minded people.*
*Love is a very august contemplation.*
Friendship. XXXVII.
Pro.
*Friendship does the same things as fortitude; but*
*more sweetly.*
*Friendship is the sweet seasoning of all good*
*things.*
*The worst solitude is not to have true*
*friendships.*
*A worthy vengeance for bad faith, to be deprived of friendships.*
Contra.
*He who forms close friendships, imposes new*
*obligations upon himself.*
*It is characteristic of a weak mind, to share fortune.*
Flattery. XXXVIII.
Pro.
*Flattery is more from custom, than from malice.*
*To instruct by praising, has always been the due formula*
*for the more powerful.*
Contra.
*Flattery is the style of slaves.*
*Flattery is the cement of vices.*
T Adulation

--- Page 436 ---
414      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
Flattery is that kind of fowling which, by similarity
of voice, deceives birds.
The deformity of flattery is comic, its harm
tragic.
To cure ears is most difficult.
Revenge. XXXIX.
For.
Private revenge is rustic justice.
He who repays violence violates only the law, not
a man.
The fear of private revenge is useful; for laws too
often sleep.
Against.
He who inflicted the injury gave the beginning to evil;
he who returned it took away the limit.
Revenge, the more natural it is, the more it must be restrained.
He who easily returns an injury, he perhaps was later
in time, not in will.
Innovation. XL.
For.
Every medicine is an innovation.
He who flees new remedies awaits new evils.
The greatest innovator is time; why then should we not
imitate time?
Remote examples are unsuitable; recent ones are corrupt
and ambitious.
Allow the ignorant and contentious to conduct affairs by
examples.
Just as those who introduce nobility into a family
are generally more worthy than their descendants: so innovations
of things

--- Page 437 ---
L I B E R VI. 415
of things are generally by their excellences, which become examples.
  Obstinate retention of customs is a turbulent thing,
as much as novelty.
  Since things change for the worse by themselves, if they are not changed for the better by counsel, what end will there be of evil?
  Slaves of custom, playthings of time.
Against.
  New births are deformed.
  No author pleases; except time.
  No novelty without injury; for it overturns present things.
  What has become established through use, if not good, at least is suitable among themselves.
  What innovator imitates time, which so insinuates innovations that they deceive the senses?
  What happens unexpectedly, to whom it profits, is less accepted; to whom it harms, is more troublesome.
Delay. XLI.
For.
  Fortune has sold many things to the hasty, which she gives to the delaying.
  While we hasten to embrace the beginnings of things, we grasp at shadows.
  When things are fluctuating, one must pay attention; when they are inclining, one must act.
  The first parts of actions must be committed to Argus, the last to Briareus.
Against.
  Opportunity first offers the handle of the vessel, then the belly.
T 2 Oc-

--- Page 438 ---
416          On the Advancement of Learning.
   *Opportunity, like Scylla, diminishes what is offered, [but] increases the price.*
   *Speed, the helmet of Orcus.*
   *What is done in good time, is done by judgment; what is done late, by ambition.*
               Preparation. XLII.
                        For.
   *He who undertakes a great thing with small forces, feigns opportunity so that he may hope.*
   *With small preparations, not fortune, but prudence is acquired.*
                      Against.
   *The best end of preparing is the first opportunity for acting.*
   *Let no one hope that he can bind fortune by preparation.*
   *The distinction between preparation and action are political matters: a pompous and unfortunate distinction.*
   *Great preparation is wasteful both of time and resources.*
          To Oppose Beginnings. XLIII.
                        For.
   *More dangers deceive than conquer.*
   *It is less work to apply a remedy to a danger than to observe and guard its progress.*
   *The danger is no longer light, if it seems light.*
                      Against.
   *He who prepares himself and defines danger with a remedy, teaches danger to advance.*
   *Even in the remedies for dangers, small dangers persist.*
                                             *Pra-*

--- Page 439 ---
L I B E R VI.            417
  It is better to deal with the matter with a few remedies that have pre-
vailed, than with the threats of individuals.
        Violent Counsels.  XLIV.
                    For.
  For those who embrace that gentle prudence,
increases of evil are wholesome.
  Necessity, which advises violent measures, also exe-
cutes them.
                    Against.
  Every violent remedy is pregnant with new
evil.
  No one gives violent counsels, except anger and
fear.
            Suspicion.  XLV.
                    For.
  Distrust, the sinews of prudence; but suspicion is an arthritic
medicine.
  Rightly is that faith suspected which suspicion under-
mines. Suspicion weakens fragile faith, but strengthens strong
faith.
                    Against.
  Suspicion absolves faith.
  An excess of suspicions is a kind of Civil
Mania.
        Words of the Law.  XLVI.
                    For.
  It is not interpretation, but divination, which de-
parts from the letter.
  When one departs from the letter, the judge becomes a legis-
lator.

                    T 3             Con-

--- Page 440 ---
418      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
               Against.
  *The meaning that interprets individual words must be drawn from all the words.*
  *The worst tyranny is law on the rack.*
      For Witnesses against Arguments.
               XLVII.
                For.
  *He who relies on arguments pronounces according to the orator, not according to the cause. He who trusts arguments more than witnesses ought also to trust intellect more than sense.*
  *It would be safe to trust arguments if men did nothing absurd.*
  *Arguments, when they are against testimonies, achieve this: that the matter appears wonderful, but not true.*
               Against.
  *If witnesses are to be believed against arguments, it suffices that the judge is merely not deaf.*
  *Arguments are an antidote against the poisons of testimonies.*
  *Those proofs are most safely believed which most rarely lie.*
And these *Antitheses*, (which we have now proposed)
perhaps may not have been of such great worth. But since they had already
been prepared & collected by us long ago, we did not wish
the fruit of our youthful diligence to perish: Especially since,
(if one looks more keenly into them) they are
seeds, not flowers. In this, however, they plainly breathe
youth, because they are more abundant in the *moral*, or *de-*
*monstrative* kind; in the *deliberative*,
& *judicial* very few.
                                  Third

--- Page 441 ---
L I B E R V I. 419

The third Collection, which belongs to the promptuary and is also needed, is that which it pleases us to call Minor Formulas. These, moreover, are, as it were, vestibules, back doors, antechambers, inner chambers, passages, etc., of discourse, which can indiscriminately apply to all subjects. Such are prefaces, conclusions, digressions, transitions, promises, evasions, and many things of this kind. For just as in buildings it contributes greatly both to pleasure and to utility that frontispieces, steps, doors, windows, entrances, passages, and suchlike be conveniently distributed; in the same way it happens also in discourse that these additions and interpositions (if they are gracefully and skillfully formed and placed) add much both of grace and of convenience to the structure of the entire discourse. We will propose one or two examples of these Formulas, nor will we dwell on them any longer. For although they are things of no small use, yet since we add nothing of our own in these, but merely describe bare formulas from Demosthenes, or Cicero, or some other selected Author, they seem somewhat inferior for us to spend time on them.

Examples of Minor Formulas.

Conclusion of a Deliberative Speech.

Thus it will be right to redeem past fault, and by the same effort to provide for future disadvantages.

T 4 Parti-

--- Page 442 ---
420      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
Corollary of an Accurate Partition.
*That all may understand that I wished to evade*
*nothing by remaining silent, nor to obscure anything by speaking.*
Transition with an Admonition.
*But let us pass over these things in such a way that we nevertheless leave*
*them to be contemplated and respected.*
Anticipation against an inveterate
opinion.
*I will ensure that you understand in the entire matter what the reality*
*itself has brought forth, what error has inflicted, and what envy has*
*stirred up.*
To have enumerated these few things for examples will have been
enough: with these, we conclude the *Rhetorical Appendices*, which
pertain to the *Promptuary*.

C H A P. I V.

*Two General Traditional Appendices: Critical, & Pedagogical.*

**T**here remain two *Traditional* appendices in general;
one *Critical*, the other *Pedagogical*. For just as the principal
*Traditional* part consists in the *Writing of Books*,
so its relative part is concerned with the *Reading of Books*:
but *Reading* is either guided by the help of Masters, or perfected
by each person's own industry; and to this end serve those two
*Doctrines* which we have mentioned.
To *Criticism* pertain, first, the *refined Correction of approved*
*Authors*, and their *amended Edition*; by which both the honor
of the Authors themselves is vindicated, and light is offered to Students.
In which matter, however, it has brought no small detriment to
                                                                           studies.

--- Page 443 ---
L I B E R VII. 421
...has been brought by the rash diligence of certain men. For it is the custom of not a few *Critics*, when they encounter something they do not understand, to immediately assume a fault in the manuscript. As for example in that passage of Tacitus: When a certain Colony asserted the right of Asylum before the Senate, Tacitus relates that what they put forward was heard by the Emperor and Senate with not very favorable ears: Therefore the Legates, distrusting their cause, gave a good sum of money to Titus Vinius, so that he might advocate for them. And so in this way the matter was obtained: "*Then*" (says Tacitus) "*the Dignity and Antiquity of the Colony prevailed:*" as if the arguments, which previously seemed slight, had then received new weight with the addition of a price. But a certain *Critic*, and not one of the lowest rank, expunged the word "*Tum*" and replaced it with "*Tantum*". And by this depraved custom of *Critics* it has come to pass that (as someone wisely noted) "*the most thoroughly corrected manuscripts are very often the least pure of all.*" Indeed, to speak the truth, unless *Critics* are learned in those Sciences of which the Books edited by them treat, their diligence is not free from danger.

Secondly, pertaining to Criticism are, *the Interpretation & Explanation of Authors, Commentaries, Scholia, Notes, Spicilegia,* and similar works. However, in labors of this kind, that worst sort of disease has, as it were, invaded some *Critics*, so that they skip over many of the more obscure points, but dwell and expatiate to the point of tedium on those that are sufficiently clear. Evidently, the aim is not so much that the Author himself be illuminated, as that the *Critic* in question may show his mani-

T 5
fold

--- Page 444 ---
422      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
his manifold erudition and varied reading, seizing every opportunity. It would be especially desirable (although this matter pertains to the principal Traditive [method of delivery], not to appendices) that the Writer who treats more obscure and nobler arguments should himself subjoin his own explanations; so that the text itself is not broken up by digressions or explanations; and that the Notes do not depart from the Writer's mind. We suspect something of this kind concerning *Theon of Euclid*.

Thirdly, it pertains to Criticism (which also gave it its name) *to interpose some brief judgment concerning the Authors they edit;* and to compare them with other Writers who treat the same subjects; so that by such a judgment students may be advised both concerning the choice of books, and may approach their reading itself better instructed. And this last point is, as it were, the *Chair* of *Critics*, which certainly in our age some great Men have obliterated, greater certainly, in our judgment, than befits the measure of *Critics*.

As far as *Pedagogy* is concerned, it would be very brief to say; *Consult the Schools of the Jesuits:* For nothing that has come into use is better than these. We, however, will advise a few things in our own manner, as if gleaning ears of corn. We entirely *approve of collegiate instruction for childhood and youth;* Not in private homes; Not merely under private tutors. There is for adolescents in *Colleges* a greater emulation towards their peers; There is also the very countenance and appeara-

--- Page 445 ---
L I B E R VI. 423.
aspect of serious men; which conduces to modesty, and from the very beginning shapes tender minds to an example: Finally, there are indeed many advantages of *collegiate education*. However, regarding the order and method of instruction, I would primarily advise this: that one beware of *shortcuts*; and of a *certain precocity of doctrine*, which renders intellects audacious, and rather displays great progress than actually makes it. Moreover, some favor should be shown to *the liberty of intellects*, so that if someone does what is customary in instruction, and at the same time steals away time for other things to which he is inclined, he should by no means be restrained. Furthermore, it would be worthwhile to diligently observe (which perhaps has not yet been noted) that there are two methods of *accustoming, exercising, and preparing intellects*, and these as it were *contrasting*. *One begins with easier things, and gradually leads to more arduous ones; The other from the beginning commands and urges harder things*, so that once these are mastered, one can even pleasantly immerse oneself in easier things. For one *Method* is to begin swimming with bladders, which support; Another is to begin dancing with heavy shoes, which weigh down. Nor is it easy to say how much a prudent intermixture of *Methods* contributes to advancing the faculties, both of mind and body. Likewise, the *application and selection of studies*, according to the nature of the intellects being educated, is a matter of singular use and judgment; which Masters also owe to the parents of adolescents, well and truly noted and observed; so that concerning the kind of life to which they destine
T 6 their sons,

--- Page 446 ---
424 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
(so that they might) consult. But, and that too must be observed a little more attentively, that not only in those things to which each person is led by their own nature, are by far the greatest advancements made; but also in those things for which someone might be most unfitted by a defect of nature, remedies and cures are found in studies specifically chosen for this purpose. For example; If someone's intellect is such, as that of birds, so that it is easily carried away, nor can it sustain a discovery for the proper duration; *Mathematics* will provide a remedy for this, in which if the mind wanders a little, the demonstration must be renewed from the beginning. Also, it is clear that the role of *exercises* in education is very great. But that has been noted by few, that there ought to be not only a prudent institution of *exercises*, but also a prudent intermission. Indeed, Cicero very well noted, *that in exercises it generally happens that vices are exercised no less than faculties*; so much so that a bad habit is sometimes acquired simultaneously and insinuates itself with the good. Therefore, it is safer to intermit exercises, and repeat them from time to time, than to continue and urge them assiduously.

But enough of these things. Certainly, these things are at first glance less grand and solemn, but nevertheless fruitful and effective. For just as in plants, for their happiness or unhappiness, injuries or aids which befell them when they were tender, contribute greatly; just as also those immense growths of the Roman Empire are rightly attributed by some to the virtue and prudence of those six Kings, who were, as it were, Tutors to it in its infancy.

--- Page 447 ---
LIBER VI. 425
as guardians or nurses. Thus, certainly, the cultivation and instruction of childish or tender years possesses powers, though latent and scarcely noticed by anyone, which neither the passage of time nor the assiduousness and intensity of later efforts in a more mature age can in any way equal. It will not be out of place also to note that even mediocre faculties, if they fall upon great men or great matters, sometimes produce grave and signal effects. We will set forth a memorable example of this; which we adduce all the more because the Jesuits do not seem to despise this same discipline, with sound judgment (as it seems to us). And a thing which, if it is professional, is infamous: but made disciplinary, it is among the best. We mean, however, *Theatrical Action.* For it strengthens memory; tempers the tone and efficacy of voice and pronunciation; composes the countenance and gesture to decorum; conciliates no small confidence; and finally accustoms youths to the eyes of men. The example will be taken from Tacitus, concerning a certain *Vebulenus*, formerly an actor, but at that time serving in the Pannonian Legions. He, at the death of Augustus, had stirred up a sedition; so that Blaesus the prefect cast some of the seditious into prison. But the soldiers, having made an assault, freed them by breaking open the prisons. But Vibulenus, haranguing among the soldiers, thus began: "You (he said) have restored light and breath to these innocent and most wretched men: But who restores life to my brother, who restores my brother to me?"
whom

--- Page 448 ---
426          On the Advancement of Sciences
*whom, sent to you by the German army, concerning*
*the common good, he murdered last night*
*by his gladiators, whom he keeps and arms for the destruction of the Soldiers.*
*Answer, Blaesus, where you threw the corpse.*
*Not even enemies begrudge burial.*
*When I have filled my grief with kisses, with tears,*
*order me also to be slaughtered, provided that those who have been killed,*
*for no crime, but because we consulted for the benefit of the Legions,*
*may be buried by these men. By these words he stirred up*
*an excessive amount of envy and consternation.*
*So much so that, had it not shortly afterwards become known that*
*none of these things had happened, and indeed that he never had a brother,*
*the Soldiers would scarcely have kept their hands off the Prefect:*
*He, however, performed the whole affair as if it were*
*a play on stage.*
   Now indeed, we have arrived at the conclusion
of our treatise on rational doctrines. In
which, although we have sometimes departed from accepted *divisions*;
let no one however suppose that we disapprove of all
those *divisions* which we have not used.
For a twofold necessity is imposed upon us
for changing *divisions*: One, because these two things,
namely, to reduce things naturally related into one class,
and to cast things to be brought forth for use
into one heap, are, in themselves and in intention,
entirely different. For example, some *Secretary*
of a *King* or *Republic* undoubtedly arranges his papers in a museum
in such a way; that those which are of a similar
Nature, he puts together, such as treaties separately,
mandates separately; letters from *Foreigners*, domestic
letters, and similar things, all separately. On the
contrary, in some particular cabinet, he puts them together,

--- Page 449 ---
L I B E R VI. 427
places, which, although they are of different kinds, he nevertheless
considers will be useful at the same time: Thus indeed, in this
universal Repository of knowledge, for us, classifications
had to be established according to the nature of the things themselves:
whereas however, if some particular Science
had to be dealt with, we would have followed classifications
rather adapted to use and practice. The second
necessity for changing classifications is, because the addition
of *Desiderata* to the Sciences, and their reduction
with the rest into a complete body, also,
consequently, has shifted the classifications of the *Sciences themselves*.
For (for the sake of demonstration), suppose that the arts
which exist are represented by the Number 15; but with the *Desiderata*
added, by the Number 20. I say that the parts of the Number 15
are not the same parts as those of the Number 20. For the parts
of the Number 15 are 3 and 5. But the parts of the Number 20
are 2, 4, 5, and 10. Therefore it is clear that these things
could not have been done otherwise. And let these things be said
concerning the *Logical Sciences*.

[A decorative floral woodcut tailpiece]

F R A N-

--- Page 450 ---
428

OF FRANCIS BACON
OF VERULAM,
Viscount St. Alban,
Concerning the Dignity & Advancement
of Learning,

BOOK SEVEN.

To his King.

CHAPTER I.

*Division of Ethics, into the Doctrine of the Exemplar, & Geor-*
*gics of the mind. Division of the Exemplar, (namely of the Good) into*
*Simple Good, & Comparative Good. Division*
*of Simple Good, into Individual Good, & Good*
*of Communion.*

[Decorative initial P] We have arrived (most excellent King) at Ethi-
cs, which considers and treats of human
Will. Will is governed by right reason,
but seduced by apparent good;
the stimuli of Will are the affections, its ministers
the organs and voluntary movements. Concerning this, Solomon says,
*Above all (he says), my son, guard your heart, for*
*from it proceed the actions of life.* In the treatment
of this Science, those who have written about it seem to me
to have acted just as if someone, having promised to teach the art of writing,
should only exhibit beautiful examples,
of letters both simple and combined;
but concerning how to guide the pen, or the ways of forming chara-
cters

--- Page 451 ---
LIBER VII. 429

cters forming, they prescribe nothing: So also these (writers) have presented to us beautiful and splendid examples, and accurate descriptions or images of *good*, *virtue*, *duties*, *happiness*, as true objects and goals of human will and appetite: But how one can best aim at these goals (excellent indeed, and well established by them), that is, by what precepts the mind can be subjected and composed to attain them, either they prescribe nothing, or cursorily and less usefully. Let us discuss, as much as we please, that moral virtues in the human mind are habitual, not natural: Let us solemnly distinguish between noble spirits and the ignoble common people, that the former are led by the force of reasons, the latter by reward or punishment: Let us ingeniously prescribe that the human mind, to be rectified, ought to be bent like a stick in the opposite direction of its inclination: And let us moreover scatter other things of this kind here and there: Yet it is far from the case that these and other things of that kind excuse the absence of the thing which we now require.

I believe the cause of this neglect to be no other than that hidden rock, against which so many little ships of *Science*, striking, have suffered shipwreck: Namely, that writers disdain to occupy themselves with common and plebeian matters, which are neither subtle enough for disputation, nor illustrious enough for embellishment. Indeed, one can hardly express in words how great a calamity this very thing we are speaking of has brought: that men, by innate pride and vain glory, (have) chosen for themselves those subjects of treatment, and those methods of treating...

--- Page 452 ---
430          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
chosen, which rather commend their own talents
than serve the utility of the readers. Seneca says
excellently, *“Eloquence harms those who create a desire*
*not for things, but for itself:”* Indeed, writings ought to be
such that they excite love for the teachings themselves,
not for the teachers. Therefore, those walk in the right
way who can proclaim this with their counsels, as
Demosthenes did, and conclude them with this clause:
*“If you do these things, you will not only praise the orator*
*in the present, but yourselves also, not long after, with*
*your affairs in a better state.”* I certainly, (O excellent
King) to speak of myself as is true, both in those things
which I now publish and in those which I meditate for
the future, often knowingly and willingly sacrifice the
dignity of my intellect and name (if there be any),
while I serve human benefits. And though I ought
perhaps to be an Architect in Philosophy and Sciences,
I also become a Workman and a Porter, and anything
whatsoever finally; since I myself undertake and execute
not a few things which absolutely must be done, but
which others, because of innate pride, shun. But (to
return to the matter) what we began to say, Philosophers
have chosen for themselves in *Ethics* a certain splendid
and shining mass of material, in which they can
especially display either the sharpness of their intellect
or the vigor of their eloquence. But those things which
especially instruct Practice, since they cannot be so
beautifully adorned, they have for the most part omitted.
   Nor yet ought such excellent Men to have despaired
of a fortune similar to that which the Poet Virgil,

--- Page 453 ---
L I B E R VII. 431
lius, and dared to promise himself, and truly achieved;
who attained no less glory in eloquence, genius,
and erudition, in explaining observations on
agriculture, than in narrating the heroic deeds of Aeneas.
  _Nor am I doubtful in my mind, how great a_
    _task it is to conquer these things with words,_
  _And to add honor to these humble subjects._
  Certainly, if men seriously have it at heart not to
write in idleness what may be read in idleness, but truly
to instruct and equip an active life: these
_Georgics of the human mind_ ought to be held in no less esteem a-
mong men than those heroic representations of virtue,
good, and happiness, on which so much laborious effort has been expended.
  Therefore, we will divide _Ethics_ into two prin-
cipal doctrines; One concerning the _exemplar or i-
mage of the good;_ The other concerning the _governance
and cultivation of the mind,_ which part we are also accustomed to
call the _Georgics of the mind:_ _The former describes the
nature of good, the latter prescribes rules for conforming the mind to those things._
  The doctrine concerning the _exemplar_ (which
contemplates and describes the _nature of good_) considers good, either as _sim-
ple,_ or _compared;_ or (I say) _kinds of good,_
or _degrees._ In the latter of these, those infinite disputes,
and speculations concerning the supreme degree of good, which
they called _felicity, blessedness, the highest good,_ (which
to the pagans were like theology) the Christian
faith finally abolished and dismissed. Just as

--- Page 454 ---
432        ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
For in a way Aristotle says, *“Young people can*
*also be happy, but not otherwise than by hope;”* in the
same way, taught by Christian Faith, we ought all to
regard ourselves as minors and adolescents, so that we
may think of no other happiness than that which is
situated in Hope.
   Therefore, being freed, under good auspices, from this
*doctrine*, as if from the heaven of the Heathens; (In
which respect they undoubtedly attributed a greater ele-
vation to human nature than it was capable of: For we
see with what tragic grandeur Seneca [says]; *“It is truly*
*great to have the fragility of man, the security of God”*)
The rest, certainly, handed down by them concerning the
*doctrine of the exemplar*, we can for the most part receive
with less loss of either truth or sobriety. For, as regards
the *nature of positive and simple good*, they certainly
depicted it most beautifully and vividly, as if in excellent
paintings; most diligently representing before our eyes
the *figures, positions, kinds, affinities, parts, subjects,*
*provinces, actions, dispensations of virtues and duties*.
Nor was this the end: For they commended and insinu-
ated all these things to the human mind, also with great
acuteness and vivacity of arguments, and with the sweet-
ness of persuasions: Moreover (as far as can be accom-
plished by words) they most faithfully fortified these
same things against depraved and popular Errors, and
assaults. But as far as concerns the *nature of compara-*
*tive good*, they were in no way deficient in this matter
either; *In establishing those three orders of goods, in the*
*comparison of the contemplative life with the active,*

--- Page 455 ---
LIBER VII. 433
active, in the discrimination of virtue with struggle, and of virtue now having attained security and being confirmed, in the conflict and struggle of the honorable and the useful, in the balance of virtues among themselves, namely which one outweighs which, and similar things. So much so that I find this part concerning the exemplar to have been remarkably cultivated already, and that the Ancients, in that matter, showed themselves to be wonderful men: Yet so much so that it has left the Philosophers a long way behind, because the strenuous diligence of Theologians has also been exercised in weighing and determining duties, and moral virtues, and cases of conscience, and the circumscriptions of sin.
   Nevertheless (to return to the Philosophers), if they (before they applied themselves to popular and received notions of virtue, vice, pain, pleasure, and the rest) had paused for a little while, and had investigated the very roots of good and evil, and the fibers of those roots; they would have shed immense light, in my judgment, on all those things which would later come into inquiry: Above all, if they had consulted the _nature of things_ no less than _moral axioms_; they would have rendered their doctrines less prolix, but more profound. Since this was either entirely omitted by them, or treated very confusedly, we will briefly reconsider it; and we will try to open and purify the very sources of _moral things_, before we arrive at the _doctrine concerning the cultivation of the mind_, which we set down as _Desiderata_. For this (as we believe) will in a way endow the _doctrine of the exemplar_ with new strengths.
                               Implanted

--- Page 456 ---
434          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
   There has been implanted and impressed in every thing an appetite for a twofold *nature of good*; The one, by which *a thing is a whole in itself*: The other, by which *it is part of some greater whole*. And this latter is more worthy and more powerful than the former, since it tends to the conservation of a *more ample form*. Let the first be named, *individual good, or of self-ness*: the latter, *good of communion*. Iron is borne by a particular sympathy to the magnet: but if it is a little heavier, it abandons those affections, and like a good citizen and lover of its country, it seeks the earth, that is, the region of its kindred. Let us proceed a little further; Dense and heavy bodies seek the earth, a great congregation of dense bodies: Nevertheless, rather than the nature of things suffer a divulsion, and a *vacuum* be given (as they say), bodies of this kind will be carried upwards, and will cease from their duty *towards the earth*, so that they may perform their duty owed *to the World itself*. So it almost perpetually holds, that the *Conservation of the more Common Form* brings lesser Appetites into order. But this Prerogative of the *Good of Communion* is especially marked in man, if he has not degenerated, according to that memorable saying of Pompey the Great, who, at a time when famine was pressing upon Rome, having been put in charge of importing grain, but vehemently urged by his friends not to commit himself to the sea, as a fierce storm was approaching, responded only that, "*It is necessary that I go; not that I live*": So that the desire for life (which is greatest in the individual) [is subordinated] to love and faith in the Republic.

--- Page 457 ---
L I B E R VII. 435
the public good would not outweigh his own.
But why do we delay? No Philosophy, or Sect, or Religion, or Law, or Discipline has been found in all ages, which has so greatly exalted the good of the community, and depressed *individual good*, as much as *Holy Christian Faith*: from which it may clearly appear, that it was one and the same God, who had given those laws of nature to creatures, and indeed the Christian Law to humans. Therefore we read that some of the Elect and Holy Men wished themselves rather erased from the *Book of Life*, than that salvation should not reach their brothers; incited by a certain ecstasy of charity, and an overwhelming desire for the good of the com-
munity.
      This being established, so that it remains unmoved and unshaken, it puts an end to some of the gravest controversies in *Moral Philosophy*. First, it determines *that Question*; *concerning whether the con-
templative life is to be preferred to the active*; and that against the opinion of Aristotle. For all the reasons which are brought forward by him for the contemplative life, regard *private good*, and *only the pleasure or dignity of the individual himself*, in which matters the *contemplative life* undoubtedly carries off the palm. For the *contemplative life* is not unlike the comparison which Pythagoras used, to bring honor and glory to Phi-
losophy and contemplation. He, being asked by Hiero who he was, replied; *that Hiero was not unaware, (if per-
chance he had ever been present at the Olympic games)* that it happens in that place, that people come there; *Some to risk their for-
tune in the contests: Others indeed,*
                                                                        to

--- Page 458 ---
436          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
*like merchants, to sell their wares: Others, that*
*they might meet friends flocking from all sides, and indulge*
*in feasts and merriment: Still others, finally, that they might be*
*spectators of the rest: But that he himself was one of*
*those who had come for the sake of watching.* But men
ought to know that in this theatre of human life,
it is fitting for God and Angels alone to be Spectators.
Nor indeed could it ever have happened that doubt concerning this
matter should arise in the Church:
(although that saying, *precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints*,
has been on the lips of many: from which passage
they used to extol that civil death and the institutions
of monastic and regular life:) unless this also
lay beneath it, that that monastic life is not merely contemplative,
but is plainly engaged in ecclesiastical duties; such as
constant prayer, and sacrifices of vows, offered to God:
Likewise, the writing of Theological books, at great
leisure, for propagating the doctrine of the Divine
Law: Just as Moses also did, when he stayed
for so many days in the solitude of the mountain.
Furthermore, Enoch, *the seventh from Adam, who*
*seems to have been the prince of the contemplative Life, (for*
*he is said to have walked with God)*, nevertheless endowed
the Church with a *Book of Prophecy* (which is
also cited by Saint Jude). But as for the purely
contemplative life, and that which is terminated in itself,
and which diffuses no rays, either of heat
or of light, into human society, Theology
certainly knows it not.
   It also determines the question, agitated with such great
contention, between the *Schools of Zeno and Socrates*.

--- Page 459 ---
            L I B E R.  VII.            437
cratis on the one hand, who placed happiness in virtue,
either alone or adorned (whose parts are always most
powerful in the duties of life); and several
other Sects and Schools, on the other hand:
such as the Schools of the Cyrenaics and Epicureans:
who established it in pleasure, but virtue (as happens
in some comedies, where the mistress changes clothes
with her maid) they plainly made a handmaid:
inasmuch as without it pleasure could not be
conveniently served: nor less that other School of
Epicurus, as if reformed; which proclaimed happiness
to be nothing other than tranquility and serenity
of mind, free and empty of disturbances; as if they
wished to cast Jove from his throne, and bring back
Saturn with the golden age, when there would have been
neither summer nor winter, neither spring nor autumn,
but one and uniform temperature of the air: finally,
and that exploded School of Pyrrho and Herillus, who
supposed happiness to be placed in s

--- Page 460 ---
Dᴇ Aᴜɢᴍ. Sᴄɪᴇɴᴛ.
Furthermore, he also refutes the *Philosophy of Epictetus*, who uses this presupposition: that happiness ought to be placed in those things which are in our power, lest indeed we be subject to fortune and chance; as if, truly, it would not have been much happier to be deprived of success and frustrated in right and noble intentions and ends which embrace the public good, than to perpetually achieve one's wish in all things which relate only to our private fortune! Just as Gonsalvo, pointing to Naples with his finger to his soldiers, declared with a noble voice: *that it would be much more desirable for him, by advancing one foot, to rush to certain destruction, than by the retreat of one foot, to prolong life for many years.* To whom also agrees the heavenly Leader and Commander, who declared: *A good conscience is a perpetual feast;* By which words he openly signifies that a mind conscious of good intentions, however much it may lack success, offers a truer and purer joy, and one more in agreement with nature, than all that apparatus with which a man can be equipped, either to enjoy his desires, or to find rest for his soul.
He likewise refutes that abuse of *Philosophy* which began to spread around the time of Epictetus: Namely, that Philosophy had been turned into a kind of professional way of life, and as it were, into an Art; As if indeed the purpose of Philosophy were not that disturbances should be restrained and extinguished, but that their causes and occasions should be avoided and removed: Therefore

--- Page 461 ---
LIBER VII. 439
and that a certain particular way of life ought to be adopted for obtaining this: indeed introducing into the mind such a kind of health as Herodicus had in his body: of whom Aristotle makes mention; namely, that he did nothing else throughout his whole life than to take care of his health; and consequently abstained from countless things, as if deprived of the use of his body in the meantime. But if it is dear to men's hearts to pursue the duties of society, then that health, finally, is most to be sought after, which can bear and overcome any changes whatsoever and any impulses whatsoever. In the same way, that mind, finally, is to be considered truly and properly sound and strong, which can break through very many and very great temptations and perturbations. So that Diogenes seems to have spoken most excellently; who praised those strengths of mind *which were strong not for cautiously abstaining, but for bravely enduring;* and which can restrain the mind's impulse, even in the greatest extremities; and which (that which is praised in well-trained horses) ensure that in the shortest space they can both stop themselves and turn.

Finally, he also refutes a certain *tenderness* and *unsuitability for compliance,* noted in some of the most ancient Philosophers, and especially in those held in veneration: Who too easily withdrew themselves from civil affairs, so that they might rid themselves of indignities and perturbations, and might live more, in their own opinion, unblemished, and as if sacrosanct: Whereas it would be consistent that the constancy of a truly Moral man would be such,
[handwritten note at bottom left: Doy]
V 2                                       as

--- Page 462 ---
440          On the Advancement of Learning.
such as the same Gonsalvo required in a military man:
Namely, that his honor should be woven as if from a coarser
fabric: and by no means so thin, that anything whatsoever
could pluck and tear it.

C H A P.  II.

*Division of Individual Good, or of Self-Good, into Active*
*Good, and Passive Good. Division of Passive Good, into*
*Conservative Good, and Perfective Good.*
*Division of the Good of Communion into General Duties, and*
*Respective Duties.*

Let us therefore now repeat, and pursue first the *individual*
*good*, and *of self-good*. That we will divide into *active good*,
and *passive good*. For this difference of good also (not
unlike certainly those appellations which the Romans in
Economics were familiar with, namely *Promus* and *Condus*)
is found impressed in the whole nature of things: But it
especially reveals itself in the twofold appetite of created
things: the one, *of conserving oneself and fortifying oneself*:
the other, *of multiplying oneself and propagating oneself*: And
this latter, which is *active*, and as it were a *Promus*, seems
more powerful and more worthy: But that former, which is
*passive*, and as it were a *Condus*, can be considered inferior.
For in the universality of things, celestial nature is especially
*active*; but terrestrial nature, *passive*. Also in the delights
of living beings, there is greater pleasure in generating than
in feeding. Also in divine oracles it is pronounced, *It is more*
*blessed to give, than to receive*. Indeed, even in common life,
no one is found of so soft and effeminate a disposition, who
does not value more something that was in his wishes,
                                     V                      perfi-

--- Page 463 ---
LIBER VII. 441
to accomplish and bring to completion, rather than some sensuality or delight. And indeed, this preeminence of *active good* is immensely magnified, when considering the human condition, which is both mortal and exposed to the blows of fortune. For if permanence and certainty could be obtained in human pleasures, great value would accrue to them, due to their security and duration. But since we see the matter come down to this: *We greatly value dying later;* and, *Do not boast about tomorrow; you do not know what the day will bring forth:* it is by no means strange if we are carried by striving towards those things which do not fear the injuries of time. But those can be none other than our works; as it is said, *Their works follow them.* There is also another not insignificant preeminence of *active good*, implanted and sustained by that affection which, as an inseparable companion, adheres to human nature's side: namely, the love of novelty, or variety. But that (love of novelty/variety) is very narrow in the pleasures of the senses (which are indeed the greatest part of *passive good*), nor does it have any significant breadth: *Consider how long you have done the same things; Food, sleep, play; one runs through this circle. To wish to die, not only a brave man, or a wretched man, or a prudent man, but also a disgusted man can.* But in the actions of our life, and in our pursuits, and ambitions, there is significant variety; And this is perceived with much pleasure, while we begin, we advance, we rest intermittently, we retreat to increase our strength, we approach, finally we obtain, and so on;
V 3 Ut

--- Page 464 ---
442          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
So that it has been very truly said, *Life without purpose,*
*is languid and aimless.* Which applies equally
to the prudent and the most foolish, as Solomon says; *The*
*fool seeks according to his desire, he meddles in everything.*
Moreover, we see that very powerful Kings,
at whose nod whatever is pleasing to the senses
could be prepared, nevertheless sometimes procured for them-
selves humble and vain desires (just as the *Lyre*
was for *Nero*, *Gladiatorial combat* for *Commodus*,
*Chariot-driving* for *Antoninus*, and other things for others)
which nevertheless were to them more potent than all abundance
of sensual pleasures. So much greater pleasure does it bring
that we do something, than that we enjoy.
   Meanwhile, it must be noted a little more carefully,
that *active, individual good* differs entirely *from the good*
*of communion*; although sometimes both coincide.
For although *this individual, active good* often gives birth
to and produces works of beneficence (*which is from the virtues
of communion*); yet it makes a difference that
those works are done by most men, not with the intention
of helping or blessing others, but plainly for themselves
and their own power and greatness.
This is best seen, when *active good* impinges
upon something that is contrary *to the good of communion*.
Indeed, that gigantic condition of mind, by which those great
disturbers of the world are carried away, (such as L. Sulla, and
many others, though in a much smaller degree: who
seem to aspire to this, that all should be happy or
miserable, according as they have been friends or enemies
                                                                      to them;

--- Page 465 ---
LIBER VII. 443

enemies; and that the world, as it were, should bear their image: which is true *Theomathia*), this very thing, I say, aspires to *active good*, individual, at least *apparent*, even if it departs most widely from the *good of communion of all*.

But we shall divide *Passive Good* into *Conservative Good* and *Perfective Good*. For a threefold appetite is implanted in every thing, insofar as it pertains to the *Good of its own Being, or of the individual*. First, that it *preserves* itself: Second, that it *perfects* itself. Third, that it *multiplies itself, or diffuses itself*. And this last appetite is referred to *active good*, of which we have just spoken. Therefore, only the remaining two goods, which we mentioned, are left. Of these, the *perfective* excels. For it is a lesser thing to preserve a thing in its own state: but a greater thing, to raise it to a higher nature. Indeed, throughout all things, some nobler natures are found, to whose dignity and excellence, inferior natures aspire, as if to their origins and sources. Thus, he sang not badly of men:
*Fiery is their vigor, and heavenly their origin.*
For to man, the assumption or approximation to the Divine or Angelic nature, is the perfection of his form. Indeed, the corrupt and preposterous imitation of this *perfective good* is the very plague of human life, and a certain rapid whirlwind, which snatches away and overturns everything. Too much, while men, instead of formal and essential exaltation, fly with blind ambition to merely local exaltation. For just as the sick, V 4 reme-

--- Page 466 ---
444 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
not finding a remedy for their ill, toss and turn their body from place to place; as if by change of place they could depart from themselves and escape their internal ill: In the same way it happens in ambition, that men, carried away by a certain false image of exalting their nature, acquire nothing else than a certain height and pinnacle of place.
     But the *Conservative Good* is nothing else than the reception and enjoyment of *things congruent with our nature*. This good, although it is most simple and native, nevertheless seems the softest and lowest of goods. Indeed, this very *Good* admits of some distinction, concerning which partly the judgment of men has wavered, partly inquiry has been omitted. For the dignity and commendation of the Good of *enjoyment*, or, as it is commonly called, of *pleasure*, is situated either in the *sincerity of enjoyment*, or in its *vigor*: Of these, the one is induced and afforded by *uniformity*, the other by *variety and change*: The one has a lesser mixture of evil, the other a stronger and more vivid impression of good. Moreover, which of these is better, is debated: Then, whether human nature can retain both at once within itself, *is not inquired into*.
     And as to that, about which it is debated, that controversy between Socrates and a certain Sophist began to be aired. And Socrates indeed asserted, *that happiness consists in constant peace and tranquility of mind:* but the sophist in this, *That one should desire much, and enjoy much.*

--- Page 467 ---
LIBER VII. 445
...the Sophist, however, in this, *that one should desire much, and enjoy much.* Indeed, they even descended from arguments to insults; the Sophist saying, '*Socrates' happiness is the happiness of a log or a stone;*' and Socrates, on the contrary, saying, '*The Sophist's happiness is that of a person with scabies, who is perpetually itching and scratching.*' Yet neither opinion lacks its own foundations. For even the Epicurean School itself assents to Socrates, which did not deny that virtue plays the greatest part in happiness. And if this is so, it is more certain than certain that virtue has greater use in calming disturbances than in acquiring desired things. To the Sophist, however, that assertion seems to lend some support, *which we just mentioned, namely that perfective good is superior to conservative good;* since the acquisition of desired things seems gradually to perfect nature: which, although they may not truly do so, nevertheless the very movement in a circle presents some appearance of *progressive movement.*

But the second question, (*namely, whether human nature cannot retain both tranquility of mind and vigor of enjoyment at the same time?*) being rightly defined, renders that former one idle and superfluous. For do we not often see the minds of some people so made and composed that they are greatly affected by pleasures when they are present, and yet do not bear their loss with difficulty? So that that philosophical maxim, '*Do not use, so that you may not desire; Do not desire, so that you may not fear,*' seems to belong to a somewhat faint-hearted and distrustful mind. Indeed, most doctrines of philosophers seem to be a little too timid, and to caution humans more than the nature of things demands.
V 5

--- Page 468 ---
446      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
As, for example, when they increase the fear of death by their very remedies. For, when they make human life almost nothing else than a certain preparation and discipline for death, how can it be that that enemy does not appear wonderfully terrible, against whom there is no end to preparing defenses? Better the Poet, (among the Heathens;)
   *Who places the ultimate end of life among the gifts*
      *of Nature.* ——————
   Similarly, in all things, philosophers have striven to render the human mind too uniform and harmonious: by accustoming it least of all to contrary and extreme emotions. The reason for this, I believe, was that they themselves dedicated themselves to a private life, free and immune from business and the services of others. Rather, let men imitate the prudence of jewelers; who, if by chance some cloud or flaw is found in a gem, which could be removed in such a way that the size of the stone is not too much diminished, they remove it; otherwise, however, they leave it untouched: By the same reasoning, the serenity of minds should be consulted in such a way that magnanimity is not destroyed. And so much for *individual good* hitherto.
   Therefore, after we have now spoken of the *good of selfhood* (which we are also accustomed to call *particular, private, individual*); let us return to the *good of communion*, which regards society. This is accustomed to be called by the name of *duty*: Indeed, the word *duty* is more properly attributed to a mind well-disposed towards others: the word *virtue*

--- Page 469 ---
It seems the Latin text you intended to provide is missing from your request. The phrase "The text isThe text is..." appears repeatedly instead of the actual Latin content.

Please provide the Latin text you would like me to translate, and I will be happy to assist while preserving the formatting and maintaining continuity with the previous page you've supplied.

--- Page 470 ---
448    ON THE ADV. OF LEARNING.
and of conditions, can skillfully and vividly discuss
and define, or undertake to do so? But treatises,
which do not savor of experience, but are drawn
only from a general and scholastic knowledge
of such matters, for the most part turn out empty
and useless. For although it sometimes happens
that a spectator observes things which escape the
player, and a certain proverb, more audacious than
sound, is tossed about concerning the judgment of the common
people regarding the actions of princes, *he who stands in the valley best surveys the mountain;*
it would nevertheless be especially desirable that no one
but the most experienced and most practiced person should
involve himself in arguments of this kind. For the lucubrations
of speculative men in active matters seem
no better to those who have been practiced in action
than the dissertations of Phormio on wars were esteemed by Hanni-
bal, who held them for dreams and delusions. Only
one fault occupies those who write books about
things pertaining to their own office or art; namely,
that in adorning and exalting those very *Spartas*
of theirs, they do not know how to keep moderation.
    In this kind of books, it would be a sin
not to remember (for honor's sake) that most excellent
work, elaborated by Your Majesty, *On the Duty of a King.*
For this writing has accumulated and hidden within itself many
treasures, both conspicuous and hidden, of *Theology, Ethics,* &
*Politics;* with a notable sprinkling of other
arts: And it is, in my judgment, among the writings which
                                                                    to me

--- Page 471 ---
L I B E R VII. 449
...among the writings which I have happened to read through, it is especially sound and solid. It does not in any place either boil with the fervor of invention, or grow numb or slumber in the coldness of diligence: It is not sometimes seized by dizziness, from which it might be confused or fall out in preserving its order: It is not distracted by digressions, so that it might embrace with some winding digression those things which are nothing to the point: It is not adulterated by the dyes of perfumes or pigments; such as those use who serve the delight of readers rather than the nature of the argument: But above all, this work is strong in spirit no less than in body, inasmuch as it both agrees excellently with truth and is most suitable for use. Moreover, it entirely lacks that fault of which we spoke a little earlier (which, if in anyone else, certainly in a King, and in a writing about Royal Majesty, it might be tolerated): Namely, that it does not immoderately or invidiously extol the royal summit and pinnacle: since Your Majesty did not depict any king of _Assyria_ or _Persia_, shining and glittering with glory and external pomp: but truly _Moses_ or _David_, namely, shepherds of their people. Nor indeed will a certain truly royal saying ever escape my memory, which, in settling a most serious dispute, Your Majesty, by that sacred Spirit with which you are endowed, pronounced for the governing of peoples; Namely, _that Kings wield the reins of their kingdoms according to the Laws of their Kingdoms, just as God also [wields them] according to the Laws of Nature: and equally rarely [use] that prerogative of theirs,_
                                                                      which

--- Page 472 ---
450 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
which transcends Laws, is to be exercised by them, and we see the power of performing Miracles exercised by God. Nevertheless, from that other Book, written by your Majesty concerning Free Monarchy, it is clear to all that no less known and understood by your Majesty is the fullness of Royal power, and the Ultimates (as the Scholastics speak) of Royal Rights, than the Limits and Bounds of Royal Office and Duty. Therefore I did not hesitate to bring forward that Book written by your Majesty's pen, as a primary and most illustrious example of Treatises concerning specific and respective duties. Concerning which Book, what has already been said by me, I would certainly have said, if it had been written by any King a thousand years ago. Nor indeed does that decorum move me, which is commonly prescribed, that no one should be praised in person: provided those praises neither exceed moderation, nor are bestowed unseasonably, or without any given occasion. Cicero certainly, in that most brilliant Oration of his for M. Marcellus, does nothing else but present a certain picture, depicted with singular art, of the Praises of Caesar, although that Oration was delivered in his presence. Which also Pliny the Younger did towards Trajan. Therefore let us now return to our subject.

Furthermore, to this part concerning the respective duties of individual callings and professions, belongs another doctrine, as if related or opposed to the former; namely concerning their frauds, wiles, impostures, and vices: Since the corruptions

--- Page 473 ---
LIBER VII. 451
vations and vices are opposed to duties and virtues. Nor are these things entirely passed over in silence in very many Writings and Treatises: but often, to note them, at least a brief excursion is made. But in what way, pray tell? Through Satire, of course, and Cynically (in the manner of Lucian) rather than seriously and gravely. For indeed, more effort is expended that most things in the arts, even those useful and sound, may be assailed by a malicious tooth and exposed to ridicule for people, than that what is corrupt and vicious in them may be separated from the wholesome and uncorrupted. But Solomon says most excellently: *To the derisive seeker of knowledge, it hides itself, but to the studious it comes to meet.* For whoever approaches knowledge with a mind of mocking and despising will undoubtedly find very many things to cavil at; but very few from which he may become more learned. But a serious and prudent treatment of this subject of which we speak, and one joined with a certain integrity and sincerity, among

--- Page 474 ---
452      On the Advancement of Learning.
it can only be done, that that serpentine prudence may be joined with the innocence of the dove, unless one thoroughly understands the nature of evil itself. For without this, virtue will lack its safeguards and defenses. Indeed, nor can a good and honest man in any way correct and amend the wicked and dishonest, unless he himself has first explored all the hiding places and depths of wickedness. For, those who are of a plainly corrupt and depraved judgment, have this, that they presuppose Honesty in men to arise from a certain ignorance and simplicity, and only from this, that faith is given to Preachers and Teachers, likewise to books, moral precepts, and to those discourses which are commonly preached and praised: So much so that, unless they plainly perceive that their own depraved opinions, and corrupt and distorted principles, are explored and known no less by those who exhort and admonish than by themselves, they will scorn all integrity of morals and counsels: According to that wonderful Oracle of Solomon: *“The fool does not receive words of prudence, unless you speak those things which are in his heart.”* This part, however, concerning cautions and respective vices, we number among the *Desiderata*; and we shall call it by the name *Serious Satire*, or *Treatise on the Inner Nature of Things*.
  Also to the *doctrine of respective duties* belong *mutual duties*, between husband and wife, parents and children, master and servant: Likewise the laws of friendship and gratitude: And also the civil obligations of fraternities, colleges;
                                          to

--- Page 475 ---
L I B E R V I I. 453
of colleges; also of neighborhood; and similar things: But let this always be understood, that those things are treated here, not insofar as they are parts of civil society, (for that refers to Politics,) but insofar as the minds of individuals ought to be instructed and predisposed to uphold those bonds of society.

But the doctrine of the common good (just as that of the individual good) treats good not only simply, but also comparatively: To which end it aims to weigh duties, between man and man; between case and case; between private and public matters; between present and future time. As can be seen in that severe and cruel judgment of L. Brutus against his sons, which was extolled to the heavens with praises by most; But someone else said;
   *Unhappy, however, will posterity bear those fates.*
The same thing can be observed at that supper, to which M. Brutus, C. Cassius, and others were invited. For there, when, to sound out their minds concerning the conspiracy aimed at Caesar's life, a question was artfully raised, (*whether it would be lawful to kill a Tyrant?*) The guests expressed diverse opinions; While some said it was plainly lawful, *Because Servitude was the ultimate of evils:* Others said by no means, *Because Tyranny was less destructive than civil war.* A third group, however, as if from the School of Epicurus, asserted, *That it was unworthy for the prudent to risk danger for the foolish.* But there are very many cases of comparative duties, among which that one frequently arises: *Whether one should deviate from Justice for the sake of the safety of the Fatherland, or some such notable good in the future?* Concerning which Jason

--- Page 476 ---
454      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
Jason the Thessalian used to say: *Some things must be un-*
*justly done, so that many things may be done justly:* But
the reply is ready: *You have the author of present*
*Justice: You do not have the guarantor of future [justice].* Let
men follow what is presently good and just;
leaving future things to divine Providence.
And concerning the doctrine of the Exemplar, or of the good,
let these things have been said.

CHAPTER III.

*Division of the Doctrine of the Cultivation of the Mind; into the Doctrine*
*of the Characters of Minds; Of the Affections, and*
*of Remedies or Cures. Appendix to the Doctrine*
*of the same concerning the Congruity between the Good of the Mind, and the Good*
*of the Body.*

Now therefore, after we have spoken of the *fruit of life*
(we understand this in a philosophical sense);
it remains for us to speak of the *Cultivation of the Mind*, which
is owed to it: Without which the former part seems nothing
other than a certain image, or statue,
beautiful indeed in appearance, but destitute of movement and life.
To this opinion Aristotle himself assents in explicit words:
*It is necessary therefore to speak of virtue,*
*both what it is, and from what it is generated. For it would be almost useless*
*to know virtue, but to be ignorant of the modes and ways of acquiring*
*it. For it is not only about virtue, what kind it is, that we must inquire,*
*but also how it makes itself available: For we wish both to know the thing itself,*
*and to become masters of it: But this will not succeed according to our wish,*
*unless we know both from what, and in what way.*
In words

--- Page 477 ---
LIBER VII. 455
With words so explicit, and even repeatedly, he emphasizes this
part; which nevertheless he himself does not pursue. This is
similarly what Cicero attributed to Cato the Younger as no
common praise; namely, that he had embraced Philosophy,
*not for the sake of disputing, as a great part (does), but*
*for so living.* Although, however, owing to the sloth of the times
in which we live, few care to diligently cultivate and compose
the mind, and to establish a rule of life according to some
standard; (according to that saying of Seneca, *everyone deliberates*
*about parts of life; no one about the whole:* so much so that
this part can be considered superfluous:) nevertheless, that by no means
moves us to leave it untouched, but rather we conclude with
that Aphorism of Hippocrates, *Those who are seized by a serious*
*illness and do not feel pain, their mind is sick.* Medicine is
necessary for those people, not only for curing the disease,
but for awakening their sensation. But if anyone objects
that the cure of souls is the task of Sacred Theology, what
he asserts is most true; But nevertheless, what should prevent
a *Moral Philosopher* from being received into the service of Theology,
like a prudent handmaid and a faithful attendant, who is
ready at all her commands and serves? For just as it is stated
in the Psalm, that *the eyes of a handmaid perpetually look to*
*the hands of her mistress:* when nevertheless there is no doubt
at all that not a few things are left to the handmaid's judgment
and care: in the same way also Ethics ought entirely to render
obedience to *Theology*, and to be compliant with its precepts,
yet so that also

--- Page 478 ---
**456 ON THE AUGMENTATION OF SCIENCES.**
...and be obedient to its precepts, yet in such a way that it itself, within its own limits, may contain not a few sound and useful teachings.

This part, therefore (when I recall its excellence in my mind), not yet reduced into a *body of doctrine*, I am vehemently surprised by. Therefore, according to our custom, since we place it among the *Desiderata*, we will outline it to some extent.

Therefore, before all things in this matter (as also in all things which pertain to Practice), we must determine what is in our power and what is not. For in the one, alteration is possible; but in the other, only application. The farmer has no control either over the nature of the soil or over the temperatures of the air; likewise, nor has the Physician control either over the temperament and natural constitution of the sick person, or over the variety of accidents. But in the *cultivation of the mind* and in thoroughly healing its diseases, three things come into consideration; *Diverse characters of dispositions; Affections, & Remedies:* Just as also in healing bodies, those three things are proposed: *complexion, or constitution of the sick person, disease & cure.* But of those three, only the last is within our power; the former two are not. But also in those very things which are not in our power, no less diligent inquiry must be made than in those which are subject to our power. For a clear-sighted and accurate knowledge of those must be laid as a foundation for the *doctrine of remedies*, so that the same may be applied more conveniently and successfully. For a garment cannot be fitted to the body unless the measure of the body is first taken.
					First

--- Page 479 ---
            BOOK VII.            457
Therefore, the first article, the *doctrine concerning the cultivation of the*
*mind*, will revolve around the *diverse characters of intellects or dispositions*. Nor, however, are we speaking of those common propensities towards virtues and vices, or even towards perturbations and affections; but of those more intrinsic and radical ones. Indeed, it has sometimes struck me with wonder, even in this respect, that by *Writers*, both *Ethical* and *Political*, it has for the most part been neglected or omitted; since it could shed a most brilliant ray of light upon both sciences. In the *Traditions of Astrology*, the intellects and dispositions of men are not altogether unskillfully distinguished according to the predominance of the Planets; namely, that some are made by Nature *for contemplations*; others *for civil affairs*; others *for military service*; others *for ambition*; others *for loves*; others *for arts*; others *for a varied kind of life*. Likewise, among *Poets* (Heroic, Satirical, Tragic, Comic), images of intellects are scattered everywhere, though almost with excess, and beyond the measure of truth. Moreover, this very topic, *concerning the diverse characters of intellects*, is among those things in which the common discourses of men (which very rarely, yet sometimes happens) are wiser than the books themselves. But by far the best material and store for this Treatise ought to be sought from the more prudent *Historians*: And not only from Elogies, which they are accustomed to append upon the death of some illustrious person, but much more from the entire body of *History*, whenever such a person, as it were, steps onto the stage. For that interwoven
                                   image,

--- Page 480 ---
458      Oɴ ᴛʜᴇ Aᴜɢᴍᴇɴᴛᴀᴛɪᴏɴ ᴏғ Sᴄɪᴇɴᴄᴇs.
image, a description seems preferable to the judgment of a eulogy: Such as is found in T. Livy, of Africanus and Cato the Elder; in Tacitus, of Tiberius, Claudius, and Nero; in Herodian, of Septimius Severus; in Philip Commines, of Louis XI, King of the French; in Francesco Guicciardini, of Ferdinand of Spain, Emperor Maximilian, and of Leo and Clement, Pontiffs. For these writers, as if perpetually contemplating the images of these persons whom they chose to depict, scarcely ever mention their deeds without also sprinkling in something about their nature. Also, some accounts of papal conclaves, which we have come across, have exhibited good characters regarding the morals of Cardinals; just as the letters of Legates have done regarding the counselors of Princes. Therefore, let a diligent and full treatise be made from that material which we have mentioned (which is certainly fertile and copious). Nor indeed do we wish that these characters in Ethics be taken (as happens among Historians, and Poets, and in common speech) as complete Civil portraits; but rather as the lines and simpler strokes of the images themselves, which, composed and mixed among themselves, constitute any kind of likenesses, how many and of what kind they are, and how they are connected and subordinated to each other; so that there may be, as it were, an artificial and accurate dissection of intellects and minds, and so that the secrets of dispositions in individual humans may be revealed, and from the knowledge of these, the cures of the mind

--- Page 481 ---
LIBER VII. 459
the precepts of the mind may be better established.
   Nor indeed should only the *characters of intellects* impressed by nature be admitted into this treatise; but also those which are otherwise imposed on the mind, *from sex, age, country, health, appearance,* and similar things: and moreover those which are *from fortune, as of Princes, Nobles, commoners, rich, poor, Magistrates, common people, fortunate, miserable,* and suchlike. For we see that Plautus considers it a miracle that an old man should be beneficent: *The kindness of this man is like that of a youth.* But Saint Paul, enjoining severity of discipline towards the Cretans (*Rebuke them sharply*), accuses the character of the nation from a Poet: *Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, lazy bellies.* Sallust notes this in the characters of Kings, that it is frequent among them *to desire contradictory things. For the most part, royal wills, as vehement

--- Page 482 ---
460      Dᴇ Aᴜɢᴍ. Sᴄɪᴇɴᴛ.
Of these, none have yet been incorporated into
*Moral Philosophy*: To which they principally
belong. No less certainly than to *Agricul-*
*ture*, a treatise on the diversity of soil and clod:
Or to *Medicine*, a treatise on the complexions
or habits of different bodies. This, however,
must now at last be done, unless perhaps we wish to imitate
the rashness of Empirics, who use the same
medicines for all sick people, whatever
their constitution may be.
    There follows *the doctrine of characters, the doctrine*
*of affections and perturbations*, which are in the place
of diseases of the mind, as has already been said.
For just as ancient Politicians used to speak of *De-*
*mocracies*; That the people were
*like the sea itself*, and Orators *like the winds*: Because
just as the *Sea* would be calm and tranquil
by itself, if it were not agitated and disturbed by the *Winds*; so
also the *People* would be peaceful and manageable
by their nature, if they were not driven and
incited by *seditious Orators*: Similarly it can truly be affirmed, *that the na-*
*ture of the human mind* would be calm, and consistent
with itself, if *affections*, like winds, did not
rage and throw everything into confusion. And here again
a new wonder arose, that Aristotle, who wrote so many
books on *Ethics*, did not treat *Affections*, as a principal
member of *Ethics*, in them;
but in his *Rhetoric*, where they are treated incidentally
(insofar, namely, as they can be aroused
or moved by speech) he found a place for them:
(in which place, however, he discussed them, as much as could be done in so few
words, acutely and well:) For
                                                                    to learn/discern-

--- Page 483 ---
L I B E R VII. 461
his discussions on *pleasure and pain* in no way satisfy this Treatise: no more
than someone who would write only about light and illumination
would be said to have written about the nature of particular colors:
Indeed, pleasure and pain relate to particular affections as light relates to *Colors.*
Certainly, the *Stoics* showed greater diligence in this argument (insofar
as one may conjecture from what now exists); yet such
diligence as consisted more in the subtlety of definitions than
in any full and extensive treatise. Indeed, I also find some elegant
small books on some of the *affections; such as on anger, on useless shame,*
and a very few others. But if the whole truth must be told, the principal
teachers of this *Science* are *Poets and Historians,* in whom it is customary
for *Affections* to be depicted and dissected to the life,
How *Affections* are to be excited and kindled? How they are to be soothed and suppressed?

--- Page 484 ---
462 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
With the aid of brutes, man could not so easily accomplish [it]. Moreover, on this foundation rests that excellent and universally evident use in Civil affairs, of *reward and punishment*; which are the pillar of commonwealths; since those predominant *Affections*, of *fear and hope*, restrain and suppress all other harmful affections. Also, just as in the governance of the State, it not infrequently happens that one faction is kept in check by another faction in office, similarly it happens also in the internal governance of the mind.
    We have now come to those things which are in our power, and which operate upon the mind, and affect and turn about the will and appetite, and therefore are very powerful for changing morals. In which area philosophers ought to have inquired strenuously and diligently, *About the forces and energy of custom, exercise, habit, education, imitation, emulation, companionship, friendship, praise, reprehension, exhortation, fame, laws, books, studies*, and if there are any others. For these are those things which reign in *Morals*; By these agents the mind is affected and disposed; From these, as if from ingredients, are compounded remedies, which conduce to preserving and recovering the health of the mind, as far as it can be accomplished by human remedies. From their number we will select one or two, in which we will dwell a little, so that they may be an example to the rest. Therefore, concerning *Custom, and Habit*, we will touch briefly upon a few things.
    That opinion of Aristotle seems to me clearly to be narrowness...

--- Page 485 ---
L I B E R VII. 463
certain narrowness of contemplation and negligence: when he asserts that, in those actions which are natural, *Custom* can do nothing; using the example, *That if a stone is thrown a thousand times upwards, it does not even acquire an inclination to ascend spontaneously: moreover, that by seeing or hearing more often, we see or hear no better.* For although this holds true in some cases, where Nature is peremptory; (the reasons for which it is not convenient to give at present) it is nevertheless otherwise in those cases where nature, according to a certain latitude, permits intensity and remission. Indeed, he could have seen that a *Glove* a little too tight, by being frequently put on the hand, becomes looser; a *Staff*, by use and persistence, bent contrary to its natural flex, becomes curved and remains in the same state a little later; a *Voice*, by exercising, becomes more robust and sonorous; *Cold and Heat* are tolerated by custom; and many other things of the same kind. These latter two examples indeed approach the matter more closely than those adduced by himself. However, however this may be; the more true it is that *both virtues and vices consist in habit;* the more he ought to have striven to prescribe rules as to how such habits might be acquired or removed. For indeed, very many precepts could be drawn up concerning the prudent institution of exercises, no less for the mind than for the body. We shall recount a few of them.

      First, we must beware from the very beginning of
                        X 2                        tasks,

--- Page 486 ---
464          On the Advancement of Learning.
-tasks, either too difficult or too easy, than the
matter demands: For if too much burden is imposed,
upon a mediocre intellect you will blunt the
eagerness of hoping well; upon an intellect full of
confidence you will stir up an opinion by which it
promises itself more than it can perform; Which
brings with it sluggishness. In both temperaments
of intellect, however, it will happen that the experience
does not satisfy expectation; That which always
disheartens and confuses the mind. But if the tasks
are too light, a great loss is incurred in the sum
of progress.
    The second precept will be that, for *exercising
any faculty by which a habit may be acquired, two
times especially should be observed:* One, when the
mind is best disposed for the task; the other, when
it is worst: So that from the former, we may advance
very much on our way; from the latter, we may
wear away knots and obstacles with strenuous mental
effort, whereby the intermediate times may pass
easily and calmly.
    The third will be that precept which Aristotle
incidentally mentioned; *That with all our strength
(yet without vice) we strive in opposition to that
to which we are most impelled by nature;* Just as when
we row against the current of a whirlpool, or bend a
curved stick in the opposite direction so that it may
become straight.
    The fourth Precept depends on that axiom,
which is most true; *That the mind is drawn to
anything more happily and more smoothly, if that
to which we tend is not principal in the intention
of the agent, but is overcome as if by doing something
else;* because nature so dictates that necessity and
harsh
                                                              command

--- Page 487 ---
L I B E R VIII. 465
it generally hates harshness. There are also many other things which can be usefully taught concerning the Regulation of *Custom:* For *Custom*, if it is introduced prudently and skillfully, becomes truly (as is commonly said) *a second nature:* But if it is managed unskillfully and by chance, it will be only *an ape* of nature, which imitates nothing to the life, but only clumsily and disfiguredly.
    Similarly, if we wished to speak concerning *Books and Studies*, and their virtue and influence on *Morals*; are there not many precepts and fruitful counsels pertaining thereto? Did not one of the Fathers, with great indignation, call *Poetry* the *wine of demons:* since it truly produces many temptations, desires, and vain opinions? Is not the opinion of Aristotle very prudent and worthy of careful consideration, *that young men are not fit hearers of moral Philosophy:* because in them the ferment of perturbations is not yet settled, nor lulled to sleep by time and experience of things? And to speak the truth, is it not for this reason that the most excellent books and discourses of ancient writers (by which men were most effectively invited to virtue: both by representing *its august majesty* to the eyes of all, and by exposing popular opinions, to the ignominy of virtue, as if clothed in *the Garb of Parasites*, to ridicule) profit so little for the honesty of life and the correction of depraved morals, because they have not been accustomed to be read and re-read by men mature in age and judgment, but are left only to boys and beginners?

--- Page 488 ---
466          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
tur? Is it not also true, that young people are much less suitable listeners for Politics than for Ethics, before they are thoroughly imbued with religion and the doctrine of morals and duties: lest perchance, depraved and corrupted in judgment, they come to that opinion, that there are no true and solid moral differences in things, but that all things are to be measured by utility or success. as the Poet sings;
   *A prosperous and successful crime is called virtue.*
and again,
   *He bore the cross as the price of his crime, this one a Dia-*
      *dem.*
And indeed, the poets seem to speak these things satirically and out of indignation. But *some political books* seriously and positively assume the same thing. For thus it pleases Machiavelli to say, *That if it had happened that Caesar had been overcome in war, he would have been more odious than Catiline himself:* As if indeed nothing had intervened, apart from fortune alone, between a certain Fury, formed from lust and blood, and a lofty spirit, which, among natural men, (if ambition had been absent) ought to be embraced above all. We see also from this very thing, how necessary it is for men to drink in pious and ethical doctrines with full draughts, before they taste Politics: Namely, that those who have been nurtured in the courts of Princes and in civil affairs from their tender (as they say) nails, scarcely ever attain sincere and internal moral probity: how much less if the discipline of books has also been added? Furthermore, even in moral precepts themselves, or at least in some of
                                             them,

--- Page 489 ---
L I B E R VII. 467
of them, or should not caution likewise be applied, lest from them men become stubborn, arrogant, and unsociable, according to that saying of Cicero concerning M. Cato: *These good things, which we see, divine and excellent, know that they are his own: those things which we sometimes seek, all of them are not from nature, but from teachers.* There are also many other axioms concerning those things which are engendered in the minds of men by studies and books. For it is true what he says, *Studies pass into habits:* Which must likewise be affirmed concerning those other things, *society, reputation, ancestral laws,* and the rest, which we enumerated a little while ago.

Moreover, there is a certain cultivation of the mind, which seems still more accurate and elaborate than the rest. But it rests on this foundation: *That the minds of all mortals, at certain times, are found in a more perfect state, at others, in a more depraved state.* Therefore, the intention and institution of this cultivation should be, that those good times be fostered; *but the bad ones* as if from a calendar, be deleted and expunged. And indeed the *fixing of good times* is brought about in two ways: *by vows, or at least by most constant decrees of the mind, and by observances and exercises;* which are not so much powerful in themselves, as in this, that they constantly keep the mind in duty and obedience. *The obliteration of bad times can likewise be accomplished in a twofold manner: by some redemption, or expiation of past deeds, and by a new institution of life, as if from scratch.* But this part seems plainly to pertain to religion;
                                  X 4                      Nor

--- Page 490 ---
468          On the Advancement of Learning.
Nor is it surprising; since true and
genuine *Moral Philosophy* (as has been said before) only
performs the role of a handmaid to Theology.
      Wherefore, we will conclude this part
concerning the cultivation of the *Mind* with that *Remedy* which
of all things is most concise and summary, and again
most noble and efficacious, by which the mind may be formed
to virtue, and placed in a state nearest to perfection. This, moreover, is,
*That we choose the ends of life and actions, and propose to ourselves*
*those that are right and congruent with virtue, which*
*nevertheless are such that we have some ability*
*to attain them.* For if these things are assumed in their proper place:
that both the *ends of actions* are honorable and good,
and the *mind's resolve concerning attaining and obtaining them*,
is fixed and constant, it will follow that the mind continuously
turns and forms itself, in one operation, into
all virtues. And this certainly is that operation
which reflects the *work of Nature itself*, while the others
we have mentioned seem to be merely like *works of the hand*.
For just as a *Sculptor*, when he carves or
cuts some statue, only shapes the figure of that
part around which his hand is occupied, not
however of the others: (as if he shapes a face,
the rest of the body remains a rough and unformed
stone, until he also reaches that part:)
On the contrary, however, *Nature*, when it forms a flower
or an animal, simultaneously brings forth and produces
the rudiments of all parts: In the same way, when
virtues are acquired by habit, while we apply ourselves
to temperance, to fortitude or the other

--- Page 491 ---
LIBER VII. 469
in which we make little progress; but when we shall have thoroughly dedicated and devoted ourselves to *right* *& honest Ends*, whatever virtue those ends shall have commended and commanded to our mind, we shall find ourselves already imbued and predisposed with some aptitude and propensity to attain and express it. And this could be that state of mind which is excellently described by Aristotle: and by him, it is marked not with the character of *virtue*, but of a certain *divinity*. His very words are these: *But it is fitting to oppose to brutality that which is above humanity, heroic or divine Virtue.* And a little later, *For just as a wild beast is neither vice nor virtue, so neither is God.* *But this state is indeed something higher than virtue: that other is something different from vice.* Pliny the Younger, certainly, with the license of pagan grandiloquence, proposes Trajan's virtue as a model, not as an imitation, of divine virtue, when he says: *There is no need for men to pour out other prayers to the Gods, than that they should show themselves as benevolent and propitious lords to mortals;* *as Trajan had shown himself.* But these things savor of the profane boasting of the Pagans, who grasped at certain shadows larger than the body itself. But true Religion, and the holy Christian faith, seeks the very thing itself: by imprinting charity upon the minds of men; which is most aptly called the *bond of perfection*, because it gathers and binds all virtues together. Indeed, it was most elegantly said by Menander, concerning *sensual love,* X 5 which

--- Page 492 ---
470      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
who wrongly imitates that *Divine* one: *Love*
*is a better Sophist than a Left-handed one, for human life.*
By which he implies that the grace of character is better
formed by love, than by a Sophist and an inept teacher,
whom he calls *Left-handed*. For indeed, by all
its laborious Rules and Precepts, it cannot fashion a human
being so skillfully and readily, that he holds himself in esteem
and composes himself beautifully in all things, as love does.
Thus, without a doubt, if anyone's soul is inflamed by the fervor
of true *Charity*, it will be elevated to greater per-
fection, than through the entire *Ethical Doctrine*;
Which indeed has the nature of a *Sophist*, if compared
with that other. Moreover, as Xenophon rightly observed,
*other affections, though they elevate the soul, nevertheless*
*distort and discompose it through their ecstasies and ex-*
*cesses: but love alone, at once expands and composes it:*
Thus all other human endowments, which we admire,
while they exalt nature to a greater degree, are meanwhile subject
to excess: but *Charity* alone admits no excess.
Angels, while they aspired to power equal to the divine,
transgressed and fell: *I will ascend, and I will be like the Most High.*
Man, while he aspired to *Knowledge* equal to the Divine,
transgressed and fell: *You will be like Gods, knowing good*
*and evil.* But by aspiring to the likeness of Di-
vine Goodness or *Charity*, neither Angel nor man
ever came, or will come, into danger. Indeed, to this
very *Imitation* we are even invited: *Love your enemies,*
                                                                      bene-

--- Page 493 ---
BOOK VII. 471
do good to those who hate you, and pray for those who
persecute and slander you, that you may be children
of your father, who is in heaven, who makes his sun rise
over the good and the bad, and rains over the just and
the unjust. Moreover, even in the very Archetype of Nature,
Ethnic Religion thus places the words, (Best,
Greatest,) but Sacred Scripture declares;
His mercy is over all his works.
Therefore, this part of moral doctrine, concerning
the Georgics of the mind, we have now completed. In which, if from a
consideration of its parts, which we have touched upon,
anyone should think that our work consists only
in this, that we have reduced into an art or doctrine
those things which have been omitted by other writers,
as common and obvious, and in themselves sufficiently clear and perspicuous;
let him freely use his own judgment. Meanwhile, let him remember
that, which we warned at the beginning, that our purpose is not the
beauty of things, but to pursue use and truth.
Let him also recall for a moment that invention
of the ancient Parable, concerning the twin gates of sleep.
S

--- Page 494 ---
472      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
[Just as the good of the body consists in] beauty, strength, and pleasure; so the good of the mind, if we contemplate it according to the precepts of moral doctrine, we shall perceive to tend to this: that it renders the mind sound, and free from disturbances; Beautiful; and adorned with the ornaments of true grace; Strong, and agile for performing all the duties of life; finally, not dull, but vividly retaining the sense of honest pleasure and solace.

These things, however, just as in the body, so also in the mind, are rarely all found together at the same time. For it is easy to see many, powerful in intellectual faculties and strength of mind, whom disturbances nevertheless afflict; and whose manners are scarcely sprinkled with any elegance or grace: Others, for whom there is an abundance of elegance and grace in their manners, yet they lack, either integrity of mind, so that they might wish, or strength, so that they might be able to act rightly: Others, endowed with an honest mind, and purged from the stain of vices, who nevertheless are neither an ornament to themselves, nor useful to the Commonwealth: Others, who perhaps possess three of these, but are nevertheless endowed with a certain Stoic sadness and dullness, indeed perform actions of virtue, but do not enjoy pleasures. But if it happens that two or three of these four sometimes coincide, it very rarely happens, as we have said, that all do. Now indeed this principal member of human philosophy, which contemplates man, inasmuch as he consists of body and soul, but nevertheless isolated, and apart from society, has been treated by us.

                                        FRAN-

--- Page 495 ---
473

OF FRANCIS BACON
OF VERULAM,
Viscount St. Alban,
*On the Dignity & Advancement*
*of the Sciences,*

BOOK EIGHT.
*To His King.*

CHAP. I.
*Division of Civil Doctrine, into the Doctrine of Conver-*
*sation: The Doctrine of Business: & The Doctrine of*
*Empire, or the Commonwealth.*

[Large decorative initial V] There is an old story, (Most Excellent King)
that several Philosophers solemnly met
before the Ambassador of a foreign King,
and each, to the best of his ability, displayed his
Wisdom; so that the Ambassador might have things to report
concerning the wonderful wisdom of the Greeks. One,
however, from their number *remained silent*, and brought
nothing forward: so much so that the Ambassador, turning
to him, said: *What, indeed, do you have that I might report?*
To whom he [replied]: *Report (he said) to your King,*
*that you found among the Greeks someone who knew how to be silent.*
And indeed I had forgotten, in this Synopsis of the arts,
to insert the art of *silence*: Which, however (*since it is
often desired*) I will now teach by my own example.
For indeed, since the order of things has at last brought me to
that

--- Page 496 ---
474        ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF THE SCIENCES.
it has led me, so that a little later the art of *Empire* must be treated; and since I am writing to so great a King, who is so perfect a Master in that art, and has drawn it from its very cradle: Nor can I be entirely unmindful of what place I have held with your Majesty: I have deemed it more fitting to prove myself by *being silent* about this matter before your Majesty, rather than by writing. Indeed, Cicero makes mention not only of an art, but also of a certain eloquence, which is found in *silence*. For when he had mentioned some conversations of his, held back and forth with a certain other person, in a letter to Atticus, he writes thus: "*Here, I have taken something from your eloquence; for I was silent.*" Indeed, Pindar (to whom it is peculiar to strike the minds of men unexpectedly with some wonderful maxim, as if with a divine rod) utters something of this kind: "*Sometimes things not said affect more than things said.*" In this part, therefore, I have decided to *be silent*, or what is nearest to silence, to be very *brief*. But, before I come to the *arts of empire*, not a few things must be premised concerning other *portions of civil doctrine*.
    *Civil science* is concerned with a subject which, of all other things, is most immersed in Matter: and therefore is most difficult to reduce to axioms. There are nevertheless some things which alleviate this difficulty. For first, just as that Cato the *Censor* was accustomed to say about his Romans: "*that they are like sheep, whose flock*"

--- Page 497 ---
LIBER VIII. 475
a whole flock one would manage with less trouble than
a single one: because if you can drive a few from the flock, so that
they enter the right path, the rest will follow of their own accord:
Similarly, in this respect, the task of Ethics is in a way
more difficult than that of Politics. Secondly, Ethics proposes to itself
that the soul be imbued and filled with internal goodness:
But civil science demands nothing more than external goodness:
For this suffices for society. Therefore it not infrequently happens
that the government is good, but the times are bad:
Indeed, in Sacred History, this occurs more than once (when
good and pious Kings are spoken of) "But as yet the people had not
directed their heart unto the Lord God of their fathers."
Therefore, in this respect too, the parts of Ethics are harder. Thirdly,
Commonwealths have this characteristic, that like larger machines
they move more slowly, and not without great effort, whence they are
not so quickly undermined: For just as in Egypt seven fertile years
sustained seven barren ones: in Commonwealths, the good institution
of former times ensures that the errors of subsequent times do not
immediately bring ruin: But the decisions and customs of individual
men are accustomed to be overthrown more suddenly. This finally
burdens Ethics, and aids Politics.

Civil science has three parts, according to
three summary actions of society: The doctrine
of conduct; The doctrine of business; and the doctrine
of Empire or the Commonwealth. For there are indeed
three goods which men seek to procure for themselves from civil
society: Solace against

--- Page 498 ---
476 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
against *solitude*, aid in *business*,
and *protection against injuries*. And these three
prudences are clearly distinct from each other, and often
separate: *Prudence in social interaction,
prudence in business, and prudence in governing.*
     Indeed, as far as *social interaction* is concerned,
it certainly ought not to be affected, but much less neglected:
since prudence in its management both displays a certain
grace of manners in itself, and greatly helps in conveniently
managing affairs, both public and private. For just as
action is held in such high regard for an orator (although it is
something external) that it is even preferred to those other parts
which seem more weighty and internal; in almost the same way, in
a civil man, *social interaction*, and its management,
(however much it may be concerned with external matters)
finds, if not the highest, then certainly an excellent place. For what
weight does the *countenance* itself, and its composition, hold?
As the Poet rightly says;
     —— *Nor destroy your words with your countenance.*
For one can undermine the *force of speech* with one's
countenance, and plainly betray it. Indeed, *deeds*, no
less than *words*, can likewise be destroyed by the
countenance, if we believe Cicero. He, when he commended
affability to his brother towards the Provincials, said that it was
not primarily situated in this, that he should offer easy
access to himself, unless he also received those approaching
courteously with his very countenance. *It makes no difference
to have an open door, [and] a closed countenance.* We also
see Atticus, at the first [meeting] with Cicero
                                                                 with

--- Page 499 ---
L I B E R V I I I. 477

having met with Caesar, while the war was still raging, Atticus diligently and seriously advised Cicero by letter concerning composing his *face and bearing* for dignity and gravity. But if the moderation of *mouth and face* alone can do so much, how much more *familiar conversation*, and other things that pertain to *social interaction*? And indeed, the sum and epitome of decorum and elegance of manners are almost entirely situated in this: that as if with an even balance, we measure and maintain both our own Dignity and that of others. Which T. Livy also expressed not badly (although intent on another matter) by this characterization of a person: "*Lest (he says) I seem either arrogant or servile: of which the former is forgetting the liberty of others, the latter one's own.*" But on the contrary side, if we too eagerly pursue *urbanity* and external elegance of manners, they pass into a certain Deformed and Spurious affectation. "*For what is more unseemly than to transfer the Stage into Life?*" Furthermore, even if they do not at all fall into that vicious excess, nevertheless, too much time is consumed in such trifles, and the mind is burdened by the care of these things themselves, more than is proper. And therefore, just as in Academies, young men zealous for letters, but indulging too much in the gatherings of companions, are accustomed to be warned by their teachers, "*that Friends are thieves of time:*" so certainly that constant mental attention to decorum in *social interactions* commits a great theft from more serious meditations. Furthermore, those who so excel in *urbanity*, and seem, as it were, born for this one thing, almost always have this, that to themselves

--- Page 500 ---
478      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
they please themselves in that alone, and scarcely ever aspire to more solid and higher virtues: Whereas, on the contrary, those who are conscious of their own defects in this regard seek honor from a good reputation. For where a good reputation is present, almost everything is becoming; but where that is lacking, then indeed help must be sought from the agreeableness of manners and *urbanity*. Furthermore, in conducting affairs, you will scarcely find a more serious or frequent impediment than an overly curious observation of this external decorum; and that other thing which serves this very purpose, namely, an anxious selection of time and opportunities. For Solomon excellently says: *He who observes the wind will not sow; and he who regards the clouds will not reap.* Indeed, opportunity must be created by us more often than awaited. In a word, this *urban composition of manners* is like the garment of the mind, and therefore ought to reflect the advantages of a garment. For first, it ought to be such that it is in common use; again, that it be not too delicate or expensive. Next, it should be made in such a way that if there is any virtue in the mind, it may display it most conspicuously; if any deformity, it may supply and conceal it. Lastly, and above all, that it be not too tight, and so constrain the mind that it may restrain and impede its movements in conducting affairs. But this part of *civil science concerning conversation* has indeed been elegantly treated by some, nor should it in any way be set down as *lacking*.

                                     CHAP.

--- Page 501 ---
            BOOK VIII.            479

                  CHAP. II.

*Division of the Doctrine of Business; into the Doctrine of Scattered*
  *Occasions, and the Doctrine of the Scope of Life. An Example*
  *of the Doctrine of Scattered Occasions, from some Parables*
  *of Solomon. Precepts concerning the Scope of Life.*

**D**octrine of business we will divide into the doctrine
  of scattered occasions, and the doctrine
of the scope of life: Of which the former embraces the entire va-
riety of affairs, and is, as it were, the *Amanuensis* of common
life; The latter extracts and suggests only those things
which pertain to amplifying each person's own fortune,
which might serve each individual as a kind of private
record or codicil of their affairs. But
before we descend to particulars, we will preface something
concerning the *doctrine of business* in general.
The *doctrine of business*, according to the importance of the matter, no one
has yet treated, with great, both of letters,
and of learned men,

--- Page 502 ---
480      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
in a way sustain [this deficiency]; But that advancement happens
to few. But concerning the *prudence of business* (which
we now speak of), in which human life is very much
engaged, absolutely no books have been written
except for a few certain *civil precepts*
collected into one or two fascicles,
which in no way correspond to the magnitude of this subject.
For if some books existed on
this topic, as on others, I would not doubt at all
that learned men, equipped with some measure of experience,
would far surpass the unlearned, even those taught by long
experience, and, *using their own* (as the saying goes)
*bow*, would strike more from afar.

Nor indeed is there reason for us to fear that the *science* of this
subject is so varied that it does not fall under precepts:
For it is much narrower
than that *science of administering the Republic*; which
nevertheless we see to be excellently cultivated. Of this kind of
*prudence*, among the Romans, in the best
times, some professors seem to have existed.
For Cicero testifies that it was the custom, a little before
his own times, for Senators, most celebrated for prudence and practical
experience (*Coruncanii, Curii, Laelii*,
and others), to walk in the forum at fixed hours,
where they would make themselves available to citizens, and be
consulted, not about law, but about all kinds of affairs:
Such as *about marrying off a daughter, or educating a son,*
*or buying an estate, about a contract, an accusation,*
*a defense*, or any matter whatsoever,
that might arise in common life. From this it is clear
that there is a certain prudence of *giving counsel*,

--- Page 503 ---
L I B E R VIII. 481
in giving counsel, even in private affairs, flowing from a universal knowledge and experience of civil matters, which indeed may be exercised in particular cases, but may be drawn from a general observation of similar cases. For thus we see, in that book which Quintus Cicero wrote to his brother, *On the Candidacy for the Consulship*, (which is the only treatise we have from the ancients, as far as I remember, *on some particular business*) although it primarily aimed at giving advice concerning a matter then present, nevertheless contains many political maxims, which prescribe not only a temporary use, but a certain perpetual rule concerning popular elections. But in this kind [of writing/prudence] nothing is found which can in any way be compared with those *aphorisms* which King Solomon published: Concerning whom Scripture testifies, *His heart was like the sand of the sea*: For just as the sands of the sea surround all the shores of the world, so also his Wisdom embraced all human things, no less than divine ones. In *aphorisms*

--- Page 504 ---
482          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
in *aphorisms*, as we believe, one might justly reproach us, because we draw something from the Writers of Sacred Scripture to a political sense. Indeed I think, if those commentaries of the same Solomon were extant, concerning the *nature of things* (in which he wrote about every *vegetable, from the moss on the wall to the cedar of Lebanon, and also about animals*), it would not be unlawful to interpret them according to their natural sense. And that the same may be lawful for us in political matters.

      EXAMPLE OF A PORTION
*Of the Doctrine concerning scattered occasions, from some of Solomon's parables.*
            Parable.
1. *A soft answer breaks wrath.*
            Explanation.
  If the *wrath* of a Prince or Superior is kindled against you, and it is now your turn to speak, Solomon prescribes two things: The one, that an *answer be made*; the other, that the same *be soft*. The former contains three precepts. First, that you *beware of a sad and stubborn silence*: For that either takes the whole blame upon yourself, as if you had nothing you could answer; or secretly accuses your Lord of injustice, as if his ears were not open to a defense, even if just. Secondly, that you *beware of postponing the matter*, nor demand other time for defense: For this either brands you with the same mark as before, namely, that your Lord is carried away by excessive mental disturbance; or plainly signifies that you are preparing some artful defense.

--- Page 505 ---
LIBER VIII. 483
to meditate a defense, when you have nothing ready: So much so that it will always be best to bring forward something in the present, and from the matter as it arises, in your excuse. Thirdly, that a response be made altogether: a *response*, I say, not a mere *confession*, or a mere *submission*, but that something of apology and excuse be sprinkled in: For it is not safe to do otherwise, except among very generous and magnanimous natures; which are exceedingly rare. It follows in the latter place, that the *Response be soft*, by no means broken or harsh.

Parable.
2. *A prudent servant will rule over a foolish son; And will divide the inheritance among brothers.*

Explication.
In every troubled and discordant family, there always arises some *servant*, or *humble friend*, powerful, who conducts himself according to his own judgment, to settle the family's disputes, and to whom, on that account, both the whole family and the master himself are beholden. If he pursues his own interest, he fosters and aggravates the family's ills: but if he has truly been faithful and upright, he certainly deserves a great deal: So much so that he ought even to be considered *among brothers*, or at least *to receive the fiduciary administration of the inheritance*.

Parable.
3. *A wise man, if he contends with a fool, whether he is angry or laughs, will find no rest.*

Explication.
We are often warned to avoid an *unequal encounter*, in the sense, *Lest we contend with the more powerful.* But no less useful is the warning, which here

--- Page 506 ---
484 - ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
here Solomon shows, *Do not contend with the unworthy.* For this matter is settled by a completely unfair lot. Indeed, if we are superior, no victory follows: if we are overcome, great indignity. Nor does it help, in exercising such a contention, if sometimes we act as if *in jest*, sometimes with *pride and contempt.* For wherever we turn, we shall be made less weighty thereby, nor shall we conveniently extricate ourselves. But it is worst if such a person, with whom we contend, (as Solomon speaks,) has something akin to a *fool*, that is, if he is audacious and rash.
Parable.
4. *But also to all words that are spoken, do not apply your ear, lest perhaps you hear your servant speaking ill of you.*
Explanation.
It can scarcely be believed how much *useless curiosity* disturbs life, concerning those things which concern us: Namely, when we strive to pry into those secrets which, when detected and discovered, indeed bring grief to the mind, but help nothing for expediting counsels. For first follows *vexation and disquiet of mind*, since all human affairs are full of perfidy and ingratitude. So much so that, if some magic mirror could be procured, in which we could behold hatreds, and whatever else is stirred up against us anywhere, it would be better for us if it were immediately cast away and shattered. For things of this kind are like the rustling of leaves, and quickly vanish. Secondly, curio-

--- Page 507 ---
L I B E R. VIII. 485
that curiosity burdens the mind with excessive suspicions, which is most hostile to counsels, and renders them inconstant and complicated. Thirdly, the same curiosity very often fixes the evils themselves, which would otherwise fly past: For it is serious to provoke the consciences of men; who, if they think they are hidden, are easily changed for the better, but if they feel themselves detected, they drive out evil with evil. Therefore, the highest prudence was deservedly attributed to Pompey the Great, because he had immediately committed all of Sertorius's papers to the fire, neither reading them himself nor permitting others to do so.
        Parable.
  5. *Poverty arrives like a traveler, and indigence as if an armed man.*
        Explanation.
  It is elegantly described in the parable how the shipwrecks of fortunes supervene upon the prodigal and those careless about their family affairs. For at the beginning, step by step, and with slow paces, like a traveler, indebtedness and a strong diminution of fortune arrive, and are scarcely felt: But not long after, indigence invades like an armed man, with a hand so strong and powerful that it can no longer be resisted: since it was rightly said among the Ancients that necessity is the strongest of all things. Therefore, one must meet the traveler, and fortify oneself against the armed man.
        Parable.
  6. *He who instructs a scoffer, does himself an injury: and he who reproves the impious, generates a stain for himself.*

        Y        Expla-

--- Page 508 ---
486      ON THE AUGMENTATION OF KNOWLEDGE.
            Explanation.
   It agrees with the precept of the Savior. *That we do not*
*cast our pearls before swine.* Moreover, in this parable, the actions
of instruction and reprehension are distinguished; Likewise,
the persons of the *scoffer* and the *impious* are distinguished;
Finally, that which is repaid is distinguished. For in the former,
*wasted effort* is repaid; in the latter, even a *stain*.
For when someone teaches and instructs a *scoffer*,
first there is a loss of time; Then others also mock
the attempt, as a vain thing, and labor ill-placed;
Finally, the *scoffer* himself *holds the knowledge he has learned in contempt*. But the
matter is transacted with greater danger in the *reprehension
of the impious*; who not only does not listen (being *impious*);
but also turns his horns, and either immediately assails
the reprover, now made hateful to him, with insults, or at least
later slanders him among others.
            Parable.
   7. *A wise son makes a father glad: but a*
*foolish son is the grief of his mother.*
            Explanation.
   The comforts and sorrows of the household,
namely of the father and mother, concerning their children, are distinguished.
For a *prudent and thrifty son* is a special comfort to the father,
who knows the value of virtue better than the *mother*;
and therefore rejoices more in his son's disposition,
inclined to virtue: Moreover, perhaps his own upbringing
brings him joy, because he has educated his *son* so well,
and has impressed upon him integrity of morals, by precepts and example,
                                                              impres-

--- Page 509 ---
LIBER VIII. 487
impressed. On the contrary, *the mother feels more compassion and grief for the misfortune of her son; partly because of a more gentle and tender maternal affection; partly perhaps conscious of her own indulgence, by which she may have corrupted and depraved him.*

Parable.
8. *The memory of the just is with praises; but the name of the wicked will rot.*

Explanation.
It distinguishes between *the fame of good men and bad men, what sort it is accustomed to be after death.* *For with good men, envy being extinguished (which used to diminish their fame while they lived), their name immediately flourishes, and their praises grow stronger day by day:* *But with bad men (although their fame, through the favor of friends and men of their faction, may have lasted for a short time) a little later a loathing of their name arises, and finally those fleeting praises end in infamy, and as it were, in a heavy and foul odor.*

Parable.
9. *He who troubles his own house, will possess the winds.*

Explanation.
A very useful warning, concerning *domestic discords and troubles.* *For very many people, from quarrels with wives, or disinheritances of sons, or frequent changes of household, promise great things to themselves; as if from these, either tranquility of mind, or a more fortunate administration of their affairs, would come to them.* *But for the most part, their hopes go into the winds.* *For, partly those changes, for the most part...*
Y 2

--- Page 510 ---
488 On the Advancement of Learning.
firstly, they do not turn out for the better; then also,
these disturbers of their own household very often experience various troubles,
and the ingratitude of those whom, others having been passed over,
they adopt and choose. Moreover, in this way they generate for themselves
rumors not of the best kind, and ambiguous reputations:
For it was not badly noted by Cicero, *'All*
*reputation springs from one's household.'* Both evils, however,
are elegantly expressed by Solomon *'through the possession of winds'*:
*'For both the frustration of expectation*
*and the stirring up of rumors are rightly*
*compared to winds.'*

Parable.
10. *Better is the end of a speech than the beginning.*

Explanation.
This *parable* corrects a very common error,
not only among those who are especially devoted to words,
but also among the more prudent. That is,
that people are more anxious about *the approach and entrance*
*of their speeches* than about
*the outcome*, and they meditate more carefully on introductions and prefaces
than on the ends of their speeches.
They ought, however, neither to neglect the former, nor to fail to have the latter,
as far more important, prepared and digested within themselves;
revolving with themselves, and, as far as possible,
looking forward in their mind, what the *outcome of the speech*
will finally be, and how business can thereby be promoted
and brought to maturity. Nor is this the end.
Indeed, it is not only *epilogues* and *the conclusions of speeches*
*which pertain to the business itself* that one ought to meditate upon;
but also the care of those *speeches*
                                        to be undertaken

--- Page 511 ---
LIBER VIII. 489
to be undertaken, which they can *conveniently and elegantly interject just at the moment of departure*, although entirely alien to the business itself. Indeed, I knew two Councillors, certainly great and prudent men, and upon whom the burden of affairs then especially rested; for whom it was a perpetual and characteristic habit that whenever they communicated with their Princes about their affairs, they never ended the conversations on matters pertaining to the business itself; but always sought digressions, either to a joke, or something else that was pleasant to hear; and as the proverb says, *they would wash away their sea-talk with river water at the end.* Nor was this the least of their arts.

Parable.
11. *As dead flies make the best ointment stink; so a little folly makes a man precious in wisdom and glory.*

Explanation.
Very unfair and miserable is the condition of *men excelling in virtue*, (as the *parable* rightly notes) because their errors, however slight, are in no way forgiven. But, just as in a very bright gem, every tiny speck or cloud strikes the eyes and causes a certain annoyance: which, however, if it were found in a more flawed gem, would scarcely be noticed: Similarly, *in men endowed with singular virtue*, every slightest fault immediately falls into the eyes and conversations of men, and is met with harsher censure: which *in mediocre men* would either be entirely hidden, or easily obtain
$\quad$ Y 3 $\qquad \qquad \qquad$ pardon.

--- Page 512 ---
490        On the Advancement of Learning.
would easily find pardon. Therefore, for a very prudent man,
a small folly; for a very upright man, a small sin;
for a refined and elegantly mannered man, a little indecorum,
detracts much from his reputation and esteem.
So much so that it would not be the worst thing for *excellent men*, if
they were to mix some *absurdities* (which could be done without vice)
into their actions; so that they might retain a certain freedom
for themselves, and obscure the marks of small defects.
                Parable.
  12. *Mocking men destroy a city, but wise men avert calamity.*
                Explanation.
  It may seem strange that in describing the kind of men
who are, as it were, by nature fitted and made to undermine and
destroy republics, Solomon chose the character; Not of a man
proud and insolent; Not tyrannical and cruel;
Not rash and violent; Not impious and wicked;
Not unjust and oppressive; Not seditious
and turbulent; Not licentious and pleasure-seeking;
Not finally of a foolish and incompetent man: But of a *mocker*.
But this is most worthy of the wisdom of that King, who best
observes the preservation and overthrow of republics.
For there is scarcely a plague so similar to kingdoms and republics
than if the counselors of kings, or senators, and those who are placed
at the helm of affairs, are *mockers* by disposition.
For men of this kind always diminish the magnitude of dangers,
so that they may appear brave senators; and they insult those
who weigh dangers as is proper, as if they were timid:
                                        Con-

--- Page 513 ---
L I B E R V I I I. 491
They scoff at the mature delays of consulting and deliberating, and at considered discussions, as if they were mere rhetorical exercises, full of tediousness, and contributing nothing to the most important matters: They despise reputation, to which the counsels of Princes ought especially to be directed, as the spittle of the common people, and a thing quickly passing away: They care nothing for the force and authority of laws, as if they were mere nets by which greater matters ought least to be restrained: They reject counsels and precautions that look far ahead, as if they were mere dreams and melancholic fancies: They mock with jests and witticisms truly prudent men, skilled in affairs, and of great spirit and counsel: Finally, they simultaneously undermine all the foundations of political governance. Which ought to be more carefully noted, because this matter is conducted by secret tunnels, and not by open assault: Nor has it begun to be suspected among men (as it deserves).
                Parable.
    13. A Prince who willingly lends his ears to words

--- Page 514 ---
492          On the Advancement of Learning.
cater to desires, by slandering and maligning their competitors: Others compose plots of stories against their enemies, as if on a stage: and countless things of this kind.
And these are those who, among the *servants of the Prince*, are of a more wicked nature. But even those who are by nature more upright and better behaved, after they have perceived that there is little protection in their innocence (because the *Prince* does not know how to distinguish truth from falsehoods), cast off the integrity of their morals, and catch the courtly winds, and are carried about by them in a servile manner. *For nothing* (as Tacitus says of Claudius) *is safe with a Prince, in whose mind all things are as if implanted and commanded.* And Comines rightly observes: *It is better to be the servant of a Prince whose suspicions have no end, than of one whose credulity has no limit.*

          Parable.
     14. *A righteous man has regard for the life of his animal; but the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel.*

          Explanation.
     There has been implanted, by Nature itself, in man, a noble and excellent *feeling of compassion*; which also extends to *brute animals*; which, by divine ordinance, are subjected to his dominion. Therefore, this *compassion* has a certain analogy with that of a Prince towards his subjects. Moreover, it is most certain that the more worthy the soul is, the more it sympathizes with many. For narrow and degenerate souls think that such matters do not pertain to them at all: But that soul, which is a nobler part of the universe, is affected by communion.
          Therefore

--- Page 515 ---
**BOOK VIII. 493**
Therefore we see that under the old law there were not a few precepts, not so much merely ceremonial as *instructive of mercy*: Such was that, *concerning not eating flesh with its blood*; and similar things. Also, in the sects of the Essenes and Pythagoreans, they entirely abstained from eating animals. Which also holds true today (their superstition being inviolate) among some inhabitants of the Mogul Empire. Indeed, even the Turks (a people, though, both by race and discipline, cruel and bloodthirsty) are accustomed to bestow alms upon brute animals; nor do they tolerate the vexation and torture of animals. But lest perhaps these things which we have said seem to advocate for every kind of *mercy*, Solomon wisely adds that *the mercies of the wicked are cruel*. Such mercies are when wicked and criminal men are spared, who ought to be struck by the sword of justice: For such *mercy* is more cruel than cruelty itself. For cruelty is exercised against individuals; but that mercy, with impunity granted, arms and unleashes the entire army of criminals against innocent men.

**Parable.**
15. *The fool brings forth his whole spirit; but the wise man reserves something for the future.*

**Explanation.**
The parable corrects chiefly (as it seems) not the futility of vain men, who easily bring forth what should be said and what should be kept silent: not that frankness by which, without distinction and judgment, they rush into all people and all things: not garrulity, by which to the point of nausea
Y 5 seam

--- Page 516 ---
494           On the Advancement of Learning.
...even to the point of annoying others: but another, more hidden vice; namely, a manner of speech least of all prudent and politic; that is, when someone so conducts a conversation (in private colloquies) that whatever he has in mind, which he thinks pertains to the matter, he utters at once, as if with one breath, and in a continuous discourse. For this greatly hinders business. Indeed, first, *speech broken up, and instilled in parts*, penetrates much more deeply than continuous speech; because in continuous speech the weight of things is not distinctly and individually received, nor does it settle in through some delay, but one idea expels another before it has fully settled. Secondly, no one possesses such powerful and felicitous eloquence that, with the first rush of speech, he can *render the person he is addressing completely mute and speechless*: rather, the other will also respond in turn, and perhaps object. Then indeed it happens that what should have been reserved for refutation or reply, having been already put forward and previously touched upon, loses its force and grace. Thirdly, if someone does not pour out all at once what needs to be said, but speaks it in parts, introducing one thing first, and then another; he will perceive from the countenance and response of the person he is addressing how each point has affected him, and in what sense it has been received; so that he may more cautiously suppress or select what still remains to be said.

               Parable.
   16. *If the spirit of him that has power rises upon you, do not leave your place, for com-*
   *posure will allay great offenses.*
                                         Expla-

--- Page 517 ---
**BOOK VIII. 495**
Explanation.
The *parable* teaches how one ought to conduct oneself when one has incurred the anger and indignation of a *prince*. The precept is twofold: First, *that he not leave his place*; Second, *that he diligently and cautiously attend to the cure*, as if in some serious illness. For men are accustomed, after they have perceived their *Princes* to be moved against them, partly from impatience with disgrace, partly lest they reopen the wound by observing it, partly so that their Princes may perceive their sadness and humility, to withdraw themselves from their duties and functions, and even sometimes to restore the magistracies themselves, and the dignities they hold, into the hands of the *Princes*. But Solomon disapproves of this method of healing, as if it were harmful; and indeed with the best reason. For first, *it too much publicizes the disgrace itself*; from which then enemies and the envious become bolder to harm; and friends become more timid to help. Second, in this way it happens that the *Prince's anger*, which perhaps, if it were not divulged, would spontaneously subside, *is more fixed*, and, as if a beginning had already been made to displace the man, it is carried towards his downfall. Finally, *that withdrawal* *tastes of ill-will*, and of being hostile to the circumstances; which adds the evil of suspicion to the evil of indignation. Now, these things pertain to the *cure*. First, let him beware above all, lest by some *stupidity*, or even by *haughtiness of spirit*, he seem *not to feel the Prince's indignation* at all, or not to be affected by it as he ought: That is, that his countenance, not to
Y 6                                     sadness

--- Page 518 ---
496      DE AUGM. SCIENT.
not to a stubborn sadness, but to a grave and modest sadness compose himself: and in whatever matters are to be done, he should show himself less cheerful and joyful than usual: Moreover, it will be to his advantage to use the help and speech of some friend with the *Prince*, who may opportunely insinuate how much he is tormented by a sense of pain in his innermost being. *Secondly, he should diligently avoid all occasions, even the smallest,* through which either the matter itself, which gave cause for indignation, might be stirred up again, or the *Prince* might seize an opportunity to become angry again and rebuke him, for whatever reason, before others. *Thirdly*, he should also diligently seek out all occasions in which *his service might be pleasing to the Prince*; so that he may show a ready will to redeem past fault; and his Prince may perceive what kind of servant, if he dismisses him, he would eventually be deprived of. *Fourthly, he should either shrewdly transfer the fault itself to others; or insinuate that it was not committed with malicious intent; or even point out the malice of those who reported him to the King, or exaggerated the matter beyond measure. Finally, in all things, he should be vigilant, and* be intent *on the cure*.
                Parable.
  *17. The first to plead his case seems just: then comes*
*the other party, and examines him.*
                Explanation.
  The first information in every case, if it has settled for a little while in the mind of the judge, takes deep root, and imbues and occupies him; so much so that it can hardly be washed away, unless either some manifest falsehood
                                  in the ma-

--- Page 519 ---
L I B E R VIII. 497
in the matter of the information, or some artifice is detected in presenting it. For indeed, a bare and simple defense, though it be just and weighty, can scarcely compensate for the prejudice of the first information, or by itself restore the scale of justice, once tipped, to equilibrium. Therefore, it is safest for the judge that nothing pertaining to the merits of the case be prejudged before both parties are heard together; and it is best for the defendant, if he perceives the judge to be prejudiced, to focus on this above all (as far as the case allows), to detect some cunning and malicious deceit employed by the opposing party to abuse the judge.
            Parable.
  18. *He who delicately nourishes a servant from childhood, will afterwards find him rebellious.*
            Explanation.
  A measure must be observed by Princes and Lords, according to the counsel of Solomon, in their grace and favor towards servants. This is threefold. First, that *they be promoted by steps, not by leaps:* Secondly, that *they sometimes become accustomed to refusal:* Thirdly, (which Machiavelli rightly advises) that *they always have before their eyes something to which they can further aspire.* For unless these things are done, Princes will undoubtedly in the end receive from their servants, instead of a grateful and dutiful spirit, disdain and rebellion. For, from sudden promotion, arises *insolence;* from the perpetual attainment of desires, *impatience of refusal;* Finally, if aspirations are lacking, *likewise, alacrity and industry will be lacking.*
                                Para-

--- Page 520 ---
498      On the Advancement of Learning.
               Parable.
  19. You have seen a man swift in his work; he will stand before
Kings, nor will he be among the ignoble.
               Explanation.
  Among the virtues which Kings, in the selection of servants,
especially look for and require, the most pleasing above all
is swiftness, and diligence in expediting affairs. Men of deep prudence
are suspected by Kings, inasmuch as they are too much observers,
and are able to turn their masters, unwitting and unwilling,
by the strength of their intellect (as if by a machine).
Popular men are disliked; inasmuch as they obstruct the Kings' Splendor,
and turn the eyes of the people upon themselves. Spirited men
are often considered turbulent, and likely to dare beyond what is proper. Honest men,
and those of integrity of life, are considered difficult,
and not suited to all their master's commands. Finally,
there is no other virtue which does not have some kind of shadow
by which the minds of Kings are offended;
Only swiftness for commands

--- Page 521 ---
LIBER VIII. 499

those inclinations, deeply implanted by nature in
the minds of men; namely, that they love their hopes too much. For scarcely
is there found anyone who is not more delighted by those things
which he hopes for, than by those which he enjoys. Moreover,
*novelty* is pleasing to human nature, and is eagerly
sought. In the *successor* of a Prince, however, these two
concur; *Hope* and *Novelty*. The *parable* also
hints at the same thing that was once said; first by
Pompey to Sulla; afterwards by Tiberius concerning Macro:
*More people worship the rising sun than the setting sun.*
Nor, however, are *rulers* much moved by this
matter, or do they make much of it, just as
neither Sulla nor Tiberius did, but rather they laugh at
the fickleness of men, nor do they fight with dreams:
*For hope is (as he used to say) the dream of one awake.*

Parable.

21. *There was a small city, and few men in it;*
*A great king came against it, and besieged it,*
*and built bulwarks around it, and the*
*siege was complete: and there was found in it a poor and*
*wise man, and he delivered it by his wisdom;*
*yet no one afterwards remembered that poor man.*

Explanation.

The parable describes *the wicked and malevolent
disposition of men.* They, in difficult and narrow
circumstances, almost always flee to prudent and energetic
men, even if previously held in contempt. But as soon
as the storm has passed, they are at last
found to be ungrateful towards their preservers.
Machiavelli, however, not without reason, instituted
a question-

--- Page 522 ---
500          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
question, *Which was more ungrateful towards those who had served well,*
*the Prince, or the people?* But meanwhile, he accuses both of in-
gratitude. However, this does not arise solely from *the ingratitude
of the Prince or the people*, but usually there is added to these *the
envy of the nobles*, who secretly grieve at the event, though fortunate
and prosperous, because it did not originate from themselves: And so
they both diminish the merit of the man, and suppress him.

               Parable.
   22. *The way of the slothful is as a hedge of thorns.*

               Explanation.
   The *parable* most elegantly shows *that laziness is laborious in
the end.* For diligence, and careful preparation, ensure that the foot
does not strike against any obstacle; but that the way is made smooth
before it is entered: But he who is lazy, and defers everything to the
last moment of execution, it is necessary that he perpetually, and at
every step, walks as if through brambles and thorns, which continually
detain him, and

--- Page 523 ---
L I B E R VIII.          501
that leniency of morals is more pernicious than the cor-
ruption of gifts. For gifts are by no means
offered by everyone; but there is scarcely any
case in which something is not found that may sway
the judge's mind, if he shows partiality. For one
will be regarded as popular; another, as malicious;
another, as rich; another, as favored; another, as
recommended by a friend. Finally, all things are full
of iniquity where partiality dominates;
and for an altogether trivial cause, as it were for a morsel
of bread, judgment will be perverted.
          Parable.
  24. A poor man slandering the poor is like
a violent rain, in which famine is prepared.
          Explanation.
  This parable was anciently expressed and depicted
under the fable of the Leech, namely, both
the full and the empty. For the oppression by a poor
and hungry man is far more severe than the oppression by a rich
and full man; inasmuch as it seeks out all the tricks
of exactions, and every last bit of money.
This very thing was also accustomed to be compared to sponges,
which, when dry, suck strongly; when wet,
not so. But it contains a useful warning; both
for Princes, not to commit the prefectures of provinces,
or magistracies, to needy and indebted
men; and for peoples, not to allow their Kings
to struggle with excessive poverty.
          Parable.
  25. A fountain troubled by a foot, and a corrupted vein, is
a just man falling before the wicked.

                    Expli-

--- Page 524 ---
502          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
                      Explanation.
   The *parable* warns that republics must above all
beware of *unjust and infamous judgment* in
any celebrated and serious case, especially where
the innocent is not acquitted, but the guiltless is condemned.
For indeed, injuries rampant among private individuals
do disturb and pollute the *waters of justice*, but
as if in *rivulets*. But unjust judgments,
such as we have described, from which examples are drawn,
infect and pollute the *very fountains of justice*. After
the tribunal has yielded to the side of injustice,
the state of affairs turns into a kind of public brigandage:
And it plainly comes to pass that *man is a wolf to man*.
                      Parable.
   26. *Do not be a friend to an angry man, nor walk with a furious man.*
                      Explanation.
   The more religiously the rights of friendship among good
men are to be observed and cultivated, the more carefully
must we beware, right from the beginning, of a *prudent
choice of friends*. And the nature and
customs of friends, insofar as they concern ourselves, are entirely
to be borne. But when they impose upon us the necessity
of what kind of person we should assume
and bear towards others, it is a very harsh and unjust
condition of friendship. Therefore, it is primarily important,
as Solomon advises, for the peace and safeguards of life,
that we do not mix our affairs with *angry men*, and
those who easily provoke or take up quarrels and disputes.
For this kind of friend perpetually implicates
us in contentions and factions
                                                                 impli-

--- Page 525 ---
L I B E R VIII. 503
will involve us: so that we are compelled either to break off friendship, or to fail in our own safety.
          Parabola.
  27. *He who conceals a transgression seeks friendship; but he who repeats it in another conversation, separates allies.*
          Explicatio.
  There is a twofold way of treating concord and reconciling minds. One, which begins with *amnesty*; the other, which begins with the repetition of injuries, by adding apologies and excuses. Indeed, I recall the opinion of a very prudent and political man: *He who treats of peace, without repeating the conditions of discord, deceives minds more with the sweetness of concord than he reconciles them with equity.* But Solomon, wiser than that man, is of the contrary opinion; and approves *amnesty*, prohibits *repetition*. For in *repetition* these evils are present; first, because it is like a *nail in a wound*; then because danger threatens from a *new altercation*, (since concerning the reasons for injuries, the parties will never agree;) then finally because it leads the matter to *apologies*; But each party would rather seem to have remitted the offense than to have admitted an excuse.
          Parabola.
  28. *In every good work there will be abundance; but where words are most numerous, there is frequently want.*
          Explicatio.
  Solomon separates in this *parable* the fruit of the *labor of the tongue* and the *labor of the hands*; as if from the former comes *want*, from the latter *abundance*. Indeed,

--- Page 526 ---
DE AUGM. SCIENT.
For it happens almost perpetually that those who babble many things, boast many things, promise many things, are needy, and gain no profit from those things about which they speak. Furthermore, for the most part, they are not at all industrious or diligent in their work; but they only feed and satisfy themselves with words, as if with wind. Indeed, as the poet says, "He who is silent, is strong." He who is aware that he is making progress in his work, is pleased with himself and is silent: But he who, on the contrary, is aware that he is grasping at empty air, proclaims many and wonderful things among others.
            Parable.
  29. Open rebuke is better than hidden love.
            Explanation.
  The parable reproves the softness of friends who do not use the privilege of friendship to admonish their friends freely and boldly, both concerning their errors and their dangers. "For what shall I do," (such a soft friend is accustomed to say) "or where shall I turn? I love him as much as anyone, most greatly; and I, if anything to him..."

--- Page 527 ---
L I B E R VIII. 505
to a friend through rebuke, than that which a friend mutters due to excessive indulgence.
        Parabola.
  30. The prudent man attends to his steps; The foolish man turns aside to deceptions.
        Explicatio.
  There are two kinds of prudence. One is true and sound: The other is degenerate and false, which Solomon does not hesitate to call by the name of *folly*. He who dedicates himself to the former, guards his own ways and footsteps, foreseeing dangers, meditating remedies: using the works of the upright, fortifying himself against the wicked, cautious in beginning, not unprepared in retreating; attentive to opportunities, strenuous against impediments: with countless other things, which pertain to governing his own *actions* and *steps*. But the other kind is entirely composed of *deceits* and *cunning*, and places its hope entirely in circumventing others, and shaping them at will. The parable rightly rejects this, not only as wicked, but also as *foolish*. For firstly, it is by no means among those things which are in our power, nor does it rely on any constant rule: But new stratagems must be devised daily, as the previous ones fail and become obsolete. Secondly, he who has once incurred the reputation and opinion of being a cunning and subtle man, has entirely deprived himself of the principal *instrument* for conducting affairs, that is, *trust*: And so he will experience everything little in agreement with his wishes. Lastly, *these arts*, however beautiful they may seem, and *please*; yet they very often fail, which well

--- Page 528 ---
506      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
Tacitus rightly noted: Cunning and audacious plans, broad in expectation, difficult in execution, sad in outcome.
            Parable.
  31. Do not be too righteous, nor wiser than is fitting: why should you be snatched away suddenly?
            Explanation.
  There are times (as Tacitus says) in which for great virtues there is most certain destruction. And this happens to men excellent in virtue and justice, sometimes suddenly, sometimes long before foreseen. But if prudence is also added, that is, that they be cautious and vigilant for their own safety, then they gain this, that their ruin comes suddenly from entirely hidden and obscure plans, by which both envy is avoided and destruction attacks them unprepared. But as for that "Too Much" which is placed in the Parable (since these are not the words of some Periander, but of Solomon; who often notes the evils in human life, never prescribes them), it is to be understood not about virtue itself (in which there is no "Too Much"), but about its vain

--- Page 529 ---
L I B E R VIII. 507
            Parable.
  32. Give occasion to a wise man, and wisdom will be added to him.
            Explanation.
  The Parable distinguishes between that Wisdom which has grown into a true habit and has matured, and that which floats only in the brain and in conception, or is boasted about in speech, but has not put forth deep roots. Indeed, the former, an occasion being offered in which it may be exercised, is immediately aroused, girded, expanded, so much so that it seems greater than itself: But the latter, which before the occasion was eager, an occasion being given, becomes astonished and confused, so that even to him who thought himself endowed with it, it is called into doubt whether the precepts concerning it were not mere dreams and empty speculations.
            Parable.
  33. He who praises a friend with a loud voice, rising early, it will be to him in place of a curse.
            Explanation.
  Moderate praises, and timely, and uttered on occasion, contribute very much to the reputation of men and even to their fortune; But immoderate, and noisy, and unseasonably poured forth, are of no use; nay rather, according to the sense of the Parable, they greatly harm. For first they clearly betray themselves, either as arising from excessive benevolence, or as affected by design; by which they rather cause the praised one to lose merit with false commendations, than adorn him with true attributes. Secondly, sparing and modest praises almost invite those present to even add something to them;

--- Page 530 ---
**508      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.**
add to them; on the contrary, profuse and immoderate [praises], so that they diminish and detract something. Thirdly (which is the crux of the matter), envy is aroused against him who is praised too much; since all excessive praises seem to point to the disparagement of others, who do not deserve less.
               **Parable.**
  34. As faces are reflected in water: so are the hearts of men manifest to the prudent.
               **Explanation.**
  The Parable distinguishes between the minds of the prudent and those of other men; comparing the former to waters or mirrors, which receive the forms and images of things; while the latter are like earth or an unpolished stone, in which nothing is reflected. And for this reason, the mind of a prudent man is more aptly compared to a mirror; because in a mirror one's own image can be seen, together with the images of others: a faculty not granted to the eyes themselves or to a mere mirror. But if the mind of the prudent is so capable as to observe and discern innumerable dispositions and customs

--- Page 531 ---
LIBER VIII. 509
[it is most] suitable; so that if anyone's observation had fallen upon something that would have been conducive to common life, he should reduce and contract it into some brief sentence, or a *Parable*, or even a *Fable*. But, as for fables (as has been said elsewhere), they formerly existed as substitutes for examples and supplements: Now, when the times abound with a wealth of histories, the living aim is pursued more directly and eagerly.

But the mode of writing which best suits an argument so varied and manifold (such as a *treatise on scattered affairs and occasions*) would be that most suitable one which Machiavelli chose for treating political matters; namely, through observations, or *discourses* (as they say) upon *history and examples*. For knowledge, which is recently, and as it were in our sight, elicited from particulars, best knows the way of repeating particulars anew: And certainly it contributes much more to Practice when discourse or disputation serves under an example, than when an example is subjoined to the disputation. For not only is this order regarded, but the matter itself. For when an example is established as the basis of a disputation, it is usually proposed with the entire apparatus of circumstances; which sometimes correct the discourse, sometimes supplement it; whence it becomes a model for imitation and practice: Whereas on the contrary, examples brought forward for the sake of disputation are cited succinctly and plainly, and like slaves, only observe the commands of the disputation.
                                  Z                                  This

--- Page 532 ---
510      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
   It will indeed have been worthwhile to observe this distinction: that just as *the history of times* provides the best material for *discourses* on *Politics*, such as those of Machiavelli, so *the history of lives* are best used for *lessons concerning affairs*; since they embrace every variety of occasions and affairs, both great and small. Moreover, there is to be found a basis for *precepts concerning affairs* even more suitable than either of those *histories*: namely, that discourses be made upon *letters*, but more prudent and more serious ones; such as those of Cicero to Atticus; and others. Indeed, *letters* are accustomed to represent affairs more immediately and vividly than either *Annals* or *lives*. Therefore now, concerning both the matter and the form of the first portion of *the doctrine of affairs*, which treats of *scattered occasions*, we have spoken, and it

--- Page 533 ---
LIBER VIII. 511
...we have spoken, and that [it is] to be protected for itself, but plainly harmful to the garden. This virtue of being wise for oneself was not unknown even to the Romans themselves, although they were the best guardians of the fatherland: whence the Comic Poet [says], *“For by Pollux, a wise man makes his own fortune.”* Moreover, it was even turned into a proverb among them: *“Each man is the artisan of his own fortune.”* And Livy attributes this very thing to Cato the Elder: *“In this man there was such strength of mind and talent, that in whatever place he had been born, he seemed destined to make his own fortune for himself.”*
This kind of *prudence*, if anyone professes it and openly boasts of it, has always been considered not only un-Political (i.e., not civic-minded), but also something ill-omened and inauspicious: As was observed in the Athenian Timotheus: Who, after he had performed many splendid deeds for the honor and benefit of his state, and rendered an account of his administration to the people (as was then the custom), concluded each point with this clause: *“And in this matter, fortune played no part.”* It happened indeed that after that time, nothing ever turned out fortunately for him. Truly, this is too boastful and too high-minded wisdom, looking to the same thing as that of Ezekiel concerning Pharaoh: *“You say, ‘The river is mine, and I made myself.’”* or that of the Prophet Habakkuk: *“They exult and sacrifice to their net,”* or also that of the Poet, concerning Mezentius, the despiser of the Gods:
*“My right hand, my god, and the spear which I poise and hurl,*
*Now be present.”*
***
Finally, Julius Caesar never (which Z 2 me-

--- Page 534 ---
512 DE AUGM. SCIENT.
(as I recall) revealed the powerlessness of his secret thoughts, except by a similar saying: For when the Soothsayer reported to him that the entrails found were not good, he murmured softly: *“They will be more propitious when I wish.”* Which saying also did not long precede the misfortune of his death. But that excess of confidence (as we have said) is a thing as profane as it is always unfortunate. Therefore, it seemed good to great and truly wise men to attribute any successes to their fortune, not to their virtue or industry: For Sulla also called himself *“Felix”* (Fortunate), not *“Magnus”* (Great); and Caesar (better than above) to the ship's pilot: *“You carry Caesar and his Fortune.”*

      Nevertheless, these sayings: *“Every man is the architect of his own fortune,” “The wise man will rule the stars,” “No road is impassable for virtue,”* and similar ones; if they are understood and applied rather as spurs to industry than as stirrups to insolence, and more so that they produce in men constancy and strength of purpose, rather than arrogance and boastfulness, they have deservedly been considered sound and wholesome, and undoubtedly have occupied some place in the hearts of magnanimous men, to the extent that they sometimes with difficulty conceal such thoughts. For we see that Augustus Caesar (who, compared with his uncle, was rather different from him than inferior, but certainly a somewhat more moderate man) at the end of his life asked his friends, who

--- Page 535 ---
L I B E R VIII. 513
...when he had breathed his last, they should applaud him, as if he had been conscious of having successfully performed the drama of his *life*. This part of *learning* also is to be numbered among the desiderata: Not that in practice it has not been used and frequently practiced, even excessively more than is proper; but because books are silent about it. Wherefore, according to our custom, as in the former part, we will review some of its chapters: And we will name it *the architect of fortune*, or (as we have said) *the doctrine of the art of rising in life*.

And indeed at first glance, I shall seem to treat a certain new and unusual subject: by teaching men how they can become *the architects of their own fortune*: A *doctrine*, certainly, to which anyone would gladly devote himself as a disciple, until he has clearly perceived its difficulty. For not lighter are, or fewer, or less arduous, the things required for acquiring fortune, than those for *virtue*: And the matter is equally difficult and severe, to become truly *Political* as truly *Moral*. But the treatment of this *doctrine* pertains very much both to the honor and to the weight of learning. For it is especially to the *honor of letters* that those pragmatic men should know that erudition is by no means like a little bird, such as a lark, which is accustomed to be carried aloft and to delight itself by singing; but nothing else: but rather to be of the hawk kind, as one who knows how to fly high, and from time to time, when it seems fit, to descend and seize its prey.
               Z 3               Next

--- Page 536 ---
**Dᴇ Aᴜɢᴍ. Sᴄɪᴇɴᴛ.**
Then, too, this very thing pertains to the perfection of learning, because it is the true norm of legitimate inquiry that nothing should be found in the globe of matter which does not have a parallel in the crystalline globe, or intellect. That is, nothing should come into Practice of which there is not also some Doctrine and Theory. Yet learning does not admire or esteem this very architecture of fortune otherwise than as a work of an inferior kind. For one's own fortune, as a gift of itself granted by God, can in no way be a worthy recompense to anyone. Indeed, it not rarely happens that men excellent in virtues voluntarily renounce their fortune, so that they may devote themselves to more sublime matters. Yet fortune is worthy, inasmuch as it is an instrument of virtue and of deserving well, of its own speculation and doctrine too.

To this doctrine pertain precepts, some summary, some scattered and varied. The summary precepts are concerned with the true knowledge

--- Page 537 ---
L I B E R V I I I. 515
particulars; and their natures, desires,
ends, customs, aids & supports, by which
they are especially sustained & thrive; and again,
their defects & weaknesses, and from what side
they are most exposed & vulnerable; friends, factions,
patrons, clienteles; and again enemies,
envious persons, competitors; also times &
opportunities;
( *You know only the man's vulnerable points and opportunities;* )
finally, institutions, & norms, which they have pre-
scribed for themselves; & similar things. Moreover, not only
must information be gathered about *persons*, but
also about particular *actions*, which from
time to time are in motion, & as it were
under the anvil; How they are governed & succeed,
by whose efforts they are fostered, by whom they are opposed,
and of what weight & moment they are, & what
they entail, & suchlike. For to know present *actions*,
both has great power in itself, &
also has this, that without this, even
the knowledge of persons will be very fallacious &
erroneous. For men change along with
actions: & they are different, while they are themselves
involved & besieged by actions: different, after they have re-
turned to their nature. And these informations about particular
things, which pertain both to *persons*
and to *actions*, are as it were
minor propositions in every active Syllogism.
For no truth or excellence of observations or axioms
(from which major political propositions are formed)
can lead to a
Z 4                                          conclusion-

--- Page 538 ---
516          On the Advancement of Learning.
...clusion's strength can suffice, if in the mi-
nor proposition there has been an error. But that
such knowledge can be acquired, Solomon is our
guarantor, who says; *Counsel in the heart*
*of man, is like deep water, but a man of understanding*
*will draw it out.* However, although this knowledge
itself does not fall under precept, because it concerns indivi-
duals; nevertheless, commands for eli-
citing it can be usefully given.
     Knowledge of men can be elicited and drawn out
in six ways: through their *faces* and *mouths*, through their *words*,
through their *deeds*, through their *dispositions*, through their *ends* (goals), final-
ly through the *reports* of others. As far as *fa-*
*ces* are concerned, let not the old ad-
age, *no trust in the forehead:* For although this itself
may not have been wrongly said, concerning the external
and general composition of *face* and *gestures*; nevertheless,
there are certain more subtle movements, and work-
ings of the eyes, mouth, *face*, and *gestures:* From which
is revealed and made clear (as Q. Ci-
cero elegantly says) as if by a *certain door of the soul.* Who was Ti-
berius Caesar more secretive? Yet Tacitus, noting
the different character and manner of speaking,
which Tiberius used in praising before the Sen-
ate the deeds performed by Germanicus and by Drusus, concerning
the praises of Germanicus thus; *More in outward show with ador-*
*ned words, than that he seemed to feel deeply.*
Concerning the praises of Drusus thus; *With fewer words, but more inten-*
*se, and with faithful speech.* Again Tacitus, noting the same
Tiberius, at other times also as somewhat transparent,
noting: *in other matters (he says) there was as it

--- Page 539 ---
L I B E R VIII. 517
help. Indeed, it would be difficult to find any
artist of dissimulation so skilled and excellent: or
any countenance so forced, and, as he says,
*commanded*: who could separate these signs from
artificial and dissembling speech, without the speech being
either more unrestrained than usual, or more *wandering* and *straying*,
or more *dry* and *as if struggling*.
As for the *words of men*, they are indeed
(as Physicians speak of Urines) *me-*
*retricious*. But these meretricious disguises are best detected
in two ways: Namely, when *words are uttered either unexpectedly, or in distur-*
*bance*. Thus Tiberius, when he was suddenly moved by Agrippina's
characteristic stinging words, and somewhat carried away,
stepped beyond the bounds of his innate dissimulation;
*These words (says Tacitus) drew forth a rare utterance from his hidden breast,*
*and having rebuked her, he warned her with a Greek verse, 'She was harmed,*
*because she did not reign'*. Therefore a Poet not unskillfully
calls disturbances of this kind *tortures*,
because by them men are compelled to betray their secrets;
————— *Tortured by wine and anger.*
Experience itself indeed testifies that very few
are found who are so faithful regarding their secrets,
and bear a mind so resolute, but that sometimes from anger,
sometimes from boasting, sometimes from deep benevolence
towards a friend, sometimes from weakness of mind (who can no
longer bear to be burdened by the weight of thoughts),
and sometimes finally from some other emotion, they reveal and
com-
                Z 5                muni-

--- Page 540 ---
**On the Advancement of Learning.**

communicate. And above all, it reveals the secrets of the mind, if one pretense has driven another pretense; according to that Spanish proverb: "*Tell a lie, and you will dig up the truth.*"
    Furthermore, even *actions themselves*, though they are the surest pledges of the human mind, are not to be entirely trusted, unless their *magnitude* and *peculiarity* have first been diligently and attentively weighed. For that is most true: "*Fraud builds up credit for itself in small things, so that it may deceive with greater profit.*" An Italian, however, thinks himself to be *standing on the very stone* where the herald proclaims, if he is treated better than usual without manifest cause. For these minor services make men drowsy and as if lulled to sleep, both regarding caution and industry: And rightly are they called by Demosthenes *the nourishment of idleness*.
    Moreover, the cunning and ambiguous *peculiarity* and *nature* of some *actions*, even those which are considered as benefits, can be clearly seen from what Mutianus perpetrated against Antonius Primus: "*Who, after returning to favor with him, but with the worst faith, elevated many of Antonius's friends to dignities; at the same time bestowing prefectures and tribuneships upon his friends.*" But by this cunning, he did not strengthen Antonius, but utterly disarmed and isolated him, by transferring his friendships to himself.
    But the surest key to unlocking the minds of men lies in thoroughly examining and understanding either their *dispositions and natures*, or their *aims and intentions*. And the weaker and simpler ones, certainly, from their *dispositions*; the more pru-

--- Page 541 ---
LIBER VIII. 519
but the more prudent, and the more secretive, are best
judged by their ends. Certainly it was wisely and wittily (though in my
judgment less truly) said by a certain envoy of the Pope,
upon his return from a Legation to a certain Nation,
where he had resided as an Ordinary. Asked about the selection
of his successor, he gave counsel; that by no means
should anyone be sent who was exceptionally prudent,
but rather only moderately so, because (he said)
*from the more prudent, no one will easily guess what*
*the people of that nation would likely do.*
Indeed, that error not infrequently occurs, and is most
common among Prudent Men, that they measure others by the standard
of their own intellect, and consequently often shoot beyond the mark,
supposing that men contemplate greater things,
and destine them for themselves, and use more subtle
stratagems than what would ever have entered their minds.
Which is also elegantly hinted at by the Italian Adage,
by which it is noted; *Of money, prudence, faith, always smaller*
*reasons are found than one would think.* Therefore, in
men of lighter intellect, because they do many absurd things,
conjecture should be drawn rather from the propensities of their
*talents, than from the destinations of their ends.*
Furthermore, Princes also (but for a far different reason)
are best judged by their talents: *But private individuals by their ends.*
For Princes, having attained the pinnacle of human
desires, have almost no ends proposed to themselves,
to which they especially vehemently and constantly aspire:
from the position and dis-
[bottom left: REV]          Z 6          tance,

--- Page 542 ---
520 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
[di]stance, of their other *actions* can be ex-
tracted and constructed the *Direction and Scale*: That which among
other things, is either the principal cause, that *their hearts*
(which Scripture declares) *are inscrutable*. But there is no private individual who is not plainly
like a traveler, and sets out intently towards some
destination of his journey, where he may stop: from which one will not
badly guess what he is about to do,
or not do. For if something is conducive to his end, it is probable he will do it:
But if it is contrary to his end, by no means. Nor
should information concerning the diversity of *ends or intellects* in men
be taken simply only, but also comparatively: What, namely, predominates,
and forces the rest into order? Thus,
as we see, Tigellinus, when he felt himself inferior to Petronius Tur-
pilianus in ministering and pre-tasting pleasures for Nero, *probed Nero's fears* (as
*Tacitus* says),

--- Page 543 ---
L I B E R VIII. 521
the most expeditious way consists of three things.
First, that *we acquire many friendships*,
with such people who have a *manifold and*
*varied* *knowledge*, both of things and of persons:
But especially it must be striven for, that we have at least
individuals at hand, who, according to the diversity
of affairs and people, can make us more certain and solidly inform
us about each matter. Secondly, that we pursue a prudent temperament
and a certain moderation, both in freedom of speech and in taciturnity: more frequently
*exercising freedom*; but, when the matter demands it, *silence*.
*Freedom* of speech indeed,
also invites and provokes others to use equal freedom
towards us: And thus it brings many things to
our knowledge: But *taciturnity* conciliates trust,
and makes people love to deposit their secrets
with us, as if in their bosom.
Thirdly, that *habit* must gradually be acquired by us,
to, with a vigilant and present mind, in
all conversations and actions, at the same time both
manage *the matter at hand*, and *observe other things that arise.*
For just as Epictetus
teaches, that a *Philosopher*, in each of his
actions, should speak thus with himself: '*I want this,*
*and also to preserve my purpose*'; So a *Politician*
in each affair should decide thus with himself; '*I want*
*this, and also to learn something that can be*
*useful in the future*'. Therefore, those who
are of such a disposition, that they do this too much, and are en-
tirely absorbed in the present business which they have in hand,
but concerning those things that intervene, neither think—

--- Page 544 ---
522      On the Advancement of Learning.
they indeed think (which Montaigne acknowledges in himself) that
those Ministers of Kings or Republics are indeed excellent,
but they limp in their own fortunes. Meanwhile, caution must
be exercised above all, that we restrain the impulse of the mind
and excessive eagerness, lest by knowing many things, we are
carried away to meddle in many things. For a certain thing is
unhappy and rash, *Polypragmosyne*. Therefore, that
*variety of knowledge of things and persons* which we recommend
acquiring, ultimately comes down to this: that we make a more
judicious selection both of the things we undertake and
of the people whose help we use, so that we may know how
to arrange and administer everything more skillfully and
more safely.
   Knowledge of others is followed by knowledge of oneself. For
no less diligence must be applied, but rather greater, that we
inform ourselves truly and accurately about ourselves, rather
than about others. Indeed, since that oracle, *Know thyself*,
is not only a rule of universal prudence, but also holds a principal
place in *Politics*. For *Saint James* rightly warns people
that he who has considered his face in a mirror, nevertheless
immediately forgets what he was like: So that frequent inspection
is entirely necessary. And this also holds true in *Politics*.
But mirrors, of course, are different: For the *Divine mirror*,
in which we ought to behold ourselves, is the word of God:
But the *Political mirror* is nothing other than the State of Affairs
and the Times in which we live.
   Therefore, a careful examination, and not such as is customary;

--- Page 545 ---
L I B E R VIII. 523
let; but rather, for one who loves himself too much, man must be instructed concerning his own *abilities, virtues, and aids*, as well as concerning his *defects, inabilities, and obstacles*: thus drawing up an account so that his defects, inabilities, and obstacles are always estimated as greater, and his abilities, virtues, and aids as less, than they really are. From such an examination, moreover, let the following come into *consideration*.

Let the *first consideration* be how any man, with his manners and his nature, agrees with the *times*; if these things are found to be congruent in all respects, he may act more freely and unconstrainedly, and be allowed to use his own genius: but if there is some incompatibility, then indeed in the entire course of life one must proceed more cautiously and correctly, and be less involved in public affairs. Thus Tiberius did, who, conscious of his own character, being not very well suited to his age, never watched public games: indeed, for twelve continuous years

--- Page 546 ---
524        On the Advancement of Learning.
let him seize a new condition. This we see done by Valen-
tino Borgia, nurtured by his father for a priestly life: which nevertheless he afterwards
renounced, obeying his own inclination, and applied
himself to a military life: although equally unworthy of a Principality as of the
Priesthood, since as a pestilent man he disgraced both.

    Let the third *consideration* be, how one stands,
*compared to his equals and rivals*, whom
it is likely he will have as competitors in his fortune: whether he should pursue that course of life; in
which the greatest scarcity of excellent men is found:
and in which it is probable that he himself,
among others, can most shine forth. This is what was done by
C. Caesar: who from the beginning was an Orator,
and pleaded cases: and was mostly engaged in the Toga (civilian life):
But when he saw *Cicero, Hortensius,
Catulus*, excel in the glory of eloquence,
but in Military Affairs no one particularly famous, ex-
cept Pompey; he desisted from his undertaking, and bidding
a great farewell to that Civil Power, he transferred
himself to military and Imperial arts:
From which he ascended to the highest pinnacle of affairs.

    Let the fourth *consideration* be, that he take into account his own nature and
inclination, *in choosing friends, and asso-
ciates*: Since to different people a different kind of *friends*
is suitable; to some, solemn, and silent;
to others, bold, and boastful; and many of that
kind. Certainly it is worthy of note, what kind
of friends Julius Caesar had (*Antony, Hirtius,*
*Pansa, Oppius, Balbus, Dolabella, Pollio*, and the
                                                                rest:)

--- Page 547 ---
L I B E R VIII. 525
who: ) They indeed used to swear, *So may I die with Caesar living;* showing infinite zeal towards Caesar; arrogant and contemptuous towards all others: And they were men diligent in conducting affairs, but mediocre in fame and reputation.
    *The fifth consideration is that one should beware of examples: and not foolishly adapt oneself to the imitation of others: as if what was open to others must necessarily be open to oneself: by no means considering how much perhaps there was a difference between one's own talent and character and theirs, which one chose as an example.* Into which error Pompey clearly fell, who, as Cicero left in writing, was so often accustomed to say: *Sulla could, shall I not be able?* In which matter he greatly deceived himself, since Sulla's talent and methods of action differed from his own "by a whole heaven" (as they say): since the one was fierce, violent, and would push for action in all things: the other serious, mindful of laws, and arranging all things for dignity and reputation, whence he was far less effective and strong in accomplishing what he had planned. There are also other *precepts* of this kind: but these suffice as an example for the rest.
    Nor indeed is, *To know oneself,* sufficient for a person, *but one must also consider with oneself how one can conveniently and prudently display, declare, and finally adapt and shape oneself. As far as displaying oneself is concerned,* we see nothing happen more frequently than that he who is inferior in the habit of virtue, is superior in the external appearance of virtue.

--- Page 548 ---
526          On the Advancement of Learning.
superior. Therefore, it is no small prerogative
of prudence, if someone, by a certain art and grace, can dis-
play a sample of himself to others: *conveniently displaying
his virtues, merits, and even fortune (as far as it can be
done without arrogance or disdain); on the contrary, art-
fully concealing his vices, defects, misfortunes, and dis-
graces:* dwelling on the former, and as it were, turning
them towards the light; seeking evasions for the latter, or
skillfully interpreting them away: and similar things. There-
fore, concerning Mucianus, a man most prudent in his time,
and most active in managing affairs, Tacitus [said]; *Of all
that he had said and done, he was a certain artful Exhibi-
tor.* This matter certainly requires some art, lest it produce
weariness and contempt: Yet so, that *a certain display, even
if it reaches the first degree of vanity, is a vice rather in
Ethics than in Politics.* Just as it is usually said of slander,
*Slander boldly, something always sticks:* so it can be said
of boasting (unless it is plainly ugly and ridiculous), *Sell
yourself boldly, something always sticks.* It will certainly
stick with the common people, even if the more prudent
ones smile. Therefore, the reputation gained among the
many will abundantly compensate for the disdain of the few.
But if this *self-display* of which we speak is managed
decently and with judgment; For example; If it displays a
certain natural candor and ingenuousness of heart: or if it
is employed at those times, either when dangers surround
(as among military men in wars), or when others are
burning with envy: or if words pertaining to one's own
praises, as if                                                               something else

--- Page 549 ---
L I B E R VIII. 527
seem to have slipped out while one was doing something else; and that they are not dwelt upon either too seriously or too extensively: or if someone so honors himself with praises, that at the same time he does not refrain from criticisms and jokes against himself: or if finally he does this, not spontaneously, but as if provoked, and incited by the insolence and insults of others: certainly this thing adds no small increment to a man's reputation. Nor indeed is their number small; who, being by nature more solid, and least boastful, and therefore lacking this art of promoting their own honor, pay the penalty for their moderation, with some loss of dignity.

But however much someone of weaker judgment, and perhaps too much of an *Ethicist*, may disapprove of this kind of *display of virtue*: no one would deny that at least effort must be made so that virtue is not, through neglect, defrauded of its just price, and estimated at less than it truly is. This diminution of price, however, in estimating virtue, usually happens in three ways: First, when someone, in managing affairs, offers and thrusts himself and his service forward, uncalled or unsummoned: for with such services, it is usually considered a reward if they are not rejected. Secondly, when someone, at the beginning of an undertaking, abuses his strengths too much; and pours out in one rush what ought to have been performed gradually; this, while it gains premature favor for well-managed affairs, in the end, however, induces satiety. Thirdly, when someone too quickly
                                                                and lightly—

--- Page 550 ---
528          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
and feels it too lightly, and in these things takes pleasure. Concerning
which a wise warning is given: *Beware lest you seem un-*
*accustomed to greater things, if this small thing delights you, just as a great one would.*
   Indeed, the diligent *concealment of defects* is by no
means of less importance than the prudent and artful *display
of virtues*. Defects, moreover, are concealed and lie hidden mostly
by a certain threefold industry, and as it were, by three hiding places:
*Caution, pretext, and confidence.*
   We call it *Caution* when we prudently abstain from those things
for which we are not equal: Whereas, on the contrary, bold
and restless natures easily thrust themselves, without judgment,
into things to which they are unaccustomed; and consequently
publish their own defects, and as it were, proclaim them. We call it
*Pretext* when we sagaciously and prudently pave and fortify
a path for ourselves, by which a benign and convenient interpretation
may be made of our *vices and defects*; as if they originated
elsewhere, or tended towards something else, than is commonly
supposed. Indeed, concerning the hiding places of vices, the Poet (says) not badly:
   *Often a vice lies hidden by the proximity of good.*
   Therefore, if we perceive any *defect* in ourselves, effort
must be made to borrow the persona and pretext of a *neighboring
virtue*, under whose shadow it may lie hidden. For example,
*gravity* should be used as a pretext for the *slow*, *gentleness* for the
*lazy*, and so for the rest. It is also useful to put forward some
probable cause, and spread it among the populace, by which,
being influenced, we may refrain from exerting our utmost strength;
so that what *we cannot do, we may seem unwilling* to do. As for
                                                                 *confi-*

--- Page 551 ---
L I B E R VIII. 529
As for confidence, it is certainly an impudent remedy, but nevertheless most certain and most effective: Namely, that one should profess to utterly despise and disdain those things which one cannot truly attain: After the manner of prudent merchants, for whom it is customary and characteristic to raise the price of their own goods, and lower that of others. There is nevertheless also another kind of *confidence*, even more impudent than this; To wit, with a brazen front to thrust and hawk one's *defects* even upon public opinion, as if one believes oneself to excel in those very things in which one is most deficient. And so that one may more easily impose this upon others, one feigns diffidence in those things in which one truly excels. Just as we see happen among Poets. For when a poet recites his poems, if he says that one particular verse is not very commendable, you will immediately hear: *“And this verse cost me more than most of the others.”* Then indeed he will bring forward some other verse, as if it were suspect to him, and he will inquire what you think of it, which he knows well enough to be the best among many, and least liable to censure. But above all, for this purpose which is now being discussed, namely, that one should display an illustrious example of oneself before others and maintain one's right in all things, I judge nothing to be more important than that one should not, through excessive goodness and sweetness of one's nature, disarm oneself and expose oneself to injuries and insults: But rather, in all things, one should occasionally emit some sparks of a free and generous spirit, carrying within itself no less sting than honey. Which indeed...

--- Page 552 ---
530          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
Indeed, a fortified way of life, together with a ready &
prepared spirit to vindicate oneself from insults,
some characteristic is incidentally imposed, & by a
certain inevitable necessity, on account of something fixed
in one's person or fortune: as happens in the
*deformed, & bastards, & those punished by some ignominy:*
Hence, men of this kind, if virtue is not lacking,
often turn out happy.
   But as for *declaring oneself*; that
is an entirely different thing from *ostentation of oneself*, about which
we spoke. For it does not refer to men's *virtues* or *defects*:
but to *particular actions of life*.
In which respect nothing is found more
political, than that a certain Moderation
be observed, prudent & sound in the mind's judgment,
concerning particular actions, by revealing, or
concealing. For although profound taciturnity,
& the concealment of counsels, & that mode of
managing affairs, which operates everything by covert & (as
modern languages rather speak) obscure arts & means,
is both useful &
admirable: yet it not rarely happens, that (as is said)
*Dissimulation gives birth to errors, which ensnare the dissimulator himself*.
For we see, that men
political, most distinguished of all, freely &
undisguisedly did not hesitate to openly declare the ends they sought.
Thus L. Sulla openly declared, *that he wished all mortals to be either happy or*
*unhappy, according as they were either friends or*
*enemies*. Thus Caesar, when he first set out
for the Gauls, did not hesitate to declare: *that he would rather be first in an obscure village, than second*
                                                                    *second*

--- Page 553 ---
L I B E R VIII. 531
than second in Rome. The same Caesar, with war already begun, was by no means a dissimulator, if we listen to what Cicero proclaims about him. *The other (alluding to Caesar) does not refuse, but in a certain way demands that, as he is, so he should be called Tyrant.* Similarly we see, in a certain letter of Cicero to Atticus, how little Augustus Caesar was a dissimulator; who, at the very outset of managing affairs, when he was still a favorite of the Senate, nevertheless was accustomed to swear in public assemblies before the people with that formula: *So may it be permitted to obtain the honors of my parent.* But that was no less a certain thing than tyranny itself. It is true that, to somewhat mitigate envy, he was accustomed at the same time to stretch out his hand towards the statue of Julius Caesar, which was placed in the Rostra. But people laughed, and applauded, and admired, and spoke among themselves thus: *What is this? What a youth?* But nevertheless they suspected no malice in him, who so candidly and openly spoke what he felt. And indeed those whom we have named attained complete success: Pompey, on the other hand, who aimed at the same goals, but by more shadowy and obscure paths, (as Tacitus speaks of him, *More hidden, not better:* and Sallust similarly accuses him of the same, *With an honest face, but a shameless mind:* ) he absolutely pursued that, and strove with countless stratagems, so that his desires and ambition

--- Page 554 ---
532          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
he might be thought to be unwilling and resisting. But when he thought he had achieved this, having been made sole Consul (which had never happened to anyone), he advanced no further towards his aims, because even those who would undoubtedly have helped him did not perceive what he wanted. So much so that he was at last compelled to enter upon the beaten and common path, namely, under the pretext of opposing Caesar, to raise arms and an army. So slow, subject to chances, and for the most part unsuccessful are those counsels wont to be, which are covered by deep dissimulation. Concerning this matter, Tacitus seems to have held the same opinion, when he established *simulations* (artifices) as a kind of *prudence of an inferior kind*, in comparison with *political arts*: attributing the former to Tiberius, but the latter to Augustus Caesar. Indeed, speaking of Livia, he says thus; *That she had been well composed with the arts of her husband, and the dissimulation of her son.*
    As for bending and shaping the mind; one must certainly strive with all one's might, that the mind may be rendered compliant to occasions and opportunities, and in no way hard or resistant towards them. For there will be no greater impediment to managing affairs, or establishing the fortunes of men, than that saying; *He remained the same, and it was not fitting:* that is, when men are the same, and use their own nature, after occasions have changed. Rightly therefore Livy, when he introduces Cato the Elder, as the most skillful architect of his own fortune, adds that he possessed a *na-*

--- Page 555 ---
BOOK VIII. 533
an adaptable mind. And hence it happens, that serious and solemn dispositions, and those unable to change, usually have more dignity than success. But this fault is deeply ingrained in some *by nature*, who by their very disposition are *viscous and knotty*, and inept at adapting. But in others it has prevailed *by custom* (which is a second *nature*) and by a certain opinion (which easily creeps into the minds of men), that they think the method of conducting affairs, which they have previously experienced as good and prosperous, should by no means be changed. For Machiavelli wisely observes concerning Fabius Maximus, *that he stubbornly wished to retain his old and ingrained custom of delaying and prolonging war, when the nature of the war was different, and demanded more vigorous counsels.* Furthermore, in others the same fault arises from a lack of judgment; when men do not timely discern the periods of things and actions; but only then do they adapt, after the opportunity has already slipped away. Demosthenes reproached his Athenians for something of this kind, saying that *they were like rustics who, proving themselves in a gladiatorial show, always transfer their shield to defend the part where they have been struck, after receiving a blow, not before.* In others again, this very thing happens, who are reluctant to lose the effort invested in the path they have once entered, nor do they know how to sound a retreat, but rather, they trust in their own steadfastness that they will be superior to the circumstances. But this *viscosity* of mind, and stubbornness, from whatever root it may finally spring, for conducting affairs,
                                  Aa

--- Page 556 ---
534          CONCERNING THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
affairs, and to the fortunes of men, is most damaging:
And nothing is more politic than to make the mind's
wheels concentric and simultaneously revolving with the wheels of fortune.
And so much for the *two summary precepts* concerning the *Architecture of Fortune*, so
far. Moreover, the *scattered* precepts are not few;
We, however, will select very few, by way of
example.
     The first *precept* is: Let the *architect of fortune*
skillfully use his rule, and rightly apply it;
That is, let him accustom his mind to
estimate the price and value of all things, according as they
conduce more or less to his fortune and ends;
And let him diligently attend to this, not superficially.
For a strange thing, but most true; many are found,
whose *logical part* of the mind (if I may so speak)
is good, but the *mathematical* part is very bad: namely,
those who judge firmly enough concerning the consequences of things;
but most unskillfully concerning their prices. Hence it happens that
some admire private and secret conversations with Princes,
others popular applause, as if they had achieved great things,
when both are very often matters full of both envy and danger: Others, moreover,
measure things by the difficulty and the labor
they have expended on them: believing that it ought to happen
that as much as they have stirred, so much also they have advanced:
Just as Caesar, concerning Cato of Utica, as if by
Irony, said, narrating how laborious he had been
and assiduous, and as it were indefatigable, yet
not much to the purpose; *He did everything (he said) with great*
*diligence*. Hence also it happens that
men often deceive themselves; who, if Great
                                                                           some-

--- Page 557 ---
LIBER VIII. 535
...who, if they use the services of some Great or Honorable man, promise themselves all prosperous things; whereas it is true that not the grandest instruments, but the most suitable, complete each work more quickly and more successfully. And for training the mind in true "Mathematics," it is worthwhile to know this first of all, and to have it written down: what should be established first, what second, and so on, for establishing and promoting each person's fortune. In the first place, I place *the amendment of the mind*. For by removing and smoothing out *the impediments and knots of the mind*, you will open the way to fortune more quickly than you will remove *the impediments of the mind* with the aids of fortune. In the second place, I place wealth, and *money*. Which many perhaps have placed in the highest place, since its use is so great for all things. But that opinion I reject for a similar reason, as Machiavelli did, in another matter not much differing from it. For although it was an old saying, *that money is the sinews of war*; he, on the contrary, asserted *that there are no other sinews of war than the sinews of brave and military men*. In precisely the same way it can truly be asserted: *that the sinews of fortune are not money, but rather the strengths of the mind, ingenuity, fortitude, audacity, constancy, moderation, industry, and similar things*. In the third place, I place *fame and reputation*; all the more because they have certain tides and times, which if you do not use opportunely, it will be difficult to restore the matter to its original state. For it is a difficult thing to turn back a reputation that is falling. In the last place, I place
Aa 2

--- Page 558 ---
536      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
not honors, to which certainly easier access is given through each of
those three, much more through
all of them combined, than if you were to start from *honors*
and then proceed to the rest. But,
just as in preserving the order of things there is no small
importance, so no much less in preserving
the order of time; By the disturbance of which one most frequently
errs, while one hastens to ends,
when beginnings ought to be attended to; and while to the greatest
things we suddenly rush, which are placed in the middle,
rashly leaping over (them). But that is rightly
enjoined; *Let us do what now presses.*
   *The second precept is*, that we beware, lest by a certain
greatness and presumption of mind, we are carried to things more arduous
than is fitting; nor that we row against
the current of the river. For the best counsel concerning
the fortunes of men (is):
   —— *Approach the Fates and the Gods.*
Let us look around in all directions, and observe,
where things are open, where closed and obstructed,
where easy, where difficult; nor let us abuse our
strengths, where no convenient access is open.
If we do this, both we will keep ourselves immune from repulse,
and in individual affairs we will not linger too
long, and we will carry off the praise of moderation,
and we will offend fewer, and finally
we will acquire the reputation of happiness; while
what perhaps would have happened spontaneously, will be
attributed to our industry.
   *The third precept* might seem to conflict somewhat
with the immediately preceding one; though,
rightly understood, not at all. That (precept) is of this
kind:

--- Page 559 ---
LIBER VIII. 537
it is: That we should not always wait for opportunities,
but sometimes provoke and lead them.
Which Demosthenes also hints at, with a certain grandilo-
quence. *And just as it is accepted*
*that a General should lead an army, so by wise*
*men the matter itself is to be led, so that what seems good to them,*
*may be done, and they themselves are not forced to pursue events.*
Indeed, if we pay careful attention, we will observe two,
and those differing, kinds
of those who are considered capable in managing affairs and conducting
business. Some indeed know how to use opportunities conveniently, but undertake or devise nothing of themselves;
Others are entirely engaged in contriving, who do not seize opportunities that arise favorably.
Of these faculties, one not joined to the other,
is to be considered entirely lame and imperfect.
*The fourth precept is;* that we undertake nothing
in which it is necessary to spend a great deal of time;
but that that verse should always pluck our ear,
*But meanwhile it flees, irreparable time flees.*
Nor is there any other reason why those who have devoted themselves
to laborious professions, or similar matters,
such as Jurists, Orators, more learned Theologians,
Writers of Books, and the like,
are less skillful in establishing and promoting their
fortune, than because they lack time
(otherwise, of course, spent) for thoroughly knowing particulars,
for seizing opportunities, and for contrivances that pertain to their
fortune.
Aa 3 -

--- Page 560 ---
538 DE AUGM. SCIENT.
which relate to their fortune, to be devised, and pondered. Moreover, in the courts of Princes and Republics, you will find those most effective, both for promoting their own fortune and for encroaching upon that of others, who perform no public office, but are perpetually occupied in this *ambit of life* of which we speak.

	The fifth *precept* is; That we should in some way imitate nature; which *does nothing in vain*. This will not be very difficult to do, if we skillfully mix and weave together our affairs of all kinds. For in every single action, the mind must be so instructed and prepared, and our intentions must be laid beneath and subordinated one to another: so that, if in some matter we cannot achieve our wishes in the *highest degree*, yet it may be permitted to settle for the *second*, or even the *third*: But if we can stick to or settle for no part of the matter at all, then indeed let us direct the effort expended to some other end (besides the intended one): But if we cannot reap any Fruit in the *present*, let us at least extract something from it that will profit in the *future*: If indeed nothing *solid*, neither in the *present* nor in the *Future*, can be drawn from it, let us at least strive that something may accrue to our *reputation* from it: And other things of this kind: always demanding accounts from ourselves, by which it may be clear that we have gained some fruit, more or less, from each of our actions and counsels: and in no way permitting, that as if confused and dismayed, we should immediately lose heart.

--- Page 561 ---
L I B E R VIII. 539
lose heart, if by chance we have not been able to reach the principal goal. For nothing less befits a Political man than to be solely intent on one thing. For he who does this will be penalized by the loss of innumerable opportunities; which usually intervene indirectly in affairs, and which perhaps might have been more propitious and convenient for other things that will be useful later, than for those which we have in hand. Therefore, let us well know that Rule: *These things ought to be done, and those not omitted.*

The sixth *precept* is, that we do not bind ourselves too peremptorily to any matter: although it may seem, at first glance, less subject to chance: But let us always have either an open window for escape: or some secret back door for return.

The seventh *precept* is that ancient saying of Bias; provided it is applied not to treachery, but to caution and moderation: *Love as if you will one day hate, and hate as if you will one day love.* For in a wonderful way, it betrays and corrupts all advantages, if one immerses oneself too much in unhappy friendships, troublesome and turbulent hatreds, or childish and futile rivalries.

These things will suffice by way of example concerning the *doctrine of the ambit of life*: For that must be frequently brought back to men's memory, that these sketches, which we use in desired things, are far from being placed in the stead of proper treatises: but are only as notes or

Aa 4 sim-

--- Page 562 ---
540          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
outlines, from which a judgment about the complete work can be made. Nor again are we so foolish as to assert that fortune is by no means acquired without such great effort as we have described. For we know well that it flows, as it were spontaneously, into the lap of some; while others acquire it by diligence alone and assiduity (with some rough caution), without much or laborious art. But just as Cicero, in depicting the perfect Orator, does not mean that every single advocate should or could be such; and again, just as in describing a Prince or Courtier (which some have undertaken to treat), a model is fashioned entirely according to the perfection of art, not however according to common practice: the same have we also done in instructing the Politician; the Politician, I say, as regards his own Fortune.

Indeed, this at least must be warned: that the precepts which we have chosen and proposed concerning this matter are all of the kind which are called good arts. For as far as bad arts are concerned: If anyone has given himself to Machiavelli for instruction—who teaches that Virtue itself is not greatly to be cared for, but only its appearance, turned towards the public, because the fame and opinion of virtue is a help to man, but virtue itself an impediment; and who in another place teaches that the Politician should lay this down as the foundation of his prudence: that he should presuppose that men cannot be rightly or safely bent or led to those things which we wish, except by fear alone; and therefore he should strive that all, as far as lies in him, should be subject, and

--- Page 563 ---
LIBER VIII. 541

...and placed in dangers and difficulties: so that his Politician seems to be, what the Italians call, a sower of thorns: Or if anyone wishes to embrace that axiom, which is cited by Cicero: 'Let friends fall, provided that enemies perish'; Just as the Triumvirs did, who redeemed the destruction of enemies with the ruin of their dearest friends: Or if anyone wishes to be an imitator of L. Catiline, that he may become an incendiary and disturber of the Republic; by which he may better fish in troubled waters and advance his fortune; ('I,' he says, 'if a fire has been kindled in my fortunes, I will not extinguish it with water, but with ruin:') Or if anyone applies that saying of Lysander to himself, who used to say: 'Boys are to be enticed with sweets, men with perjuries': Along with other wicked and pernicious doctrines of the same ilk; of which (as happens in all other things) the number is greater than that of the upright and sound: If anyone (I say) delights in such defiled prudence: I would not deny that he (since he has freed himself from all laws of charity and virtue, and has enslaved himself only to fortune) can, with greater ease and more quickly, advance his fortune. But it happens in life, just as on a road, that a shorter path is fouler and muddier: nor indeed, for one to walk on a better path, is much detour necessary.
So far is it from the truth that men ought to apply themselves to such wicked arts; that rather indeed (if only they are themselves, and are able to sustain themselves, and are not swept by the whirlwind and storm of ambition into

Aa 5. adver-

--- Page 564 ---
542          On the Advancement of Learning.
be swept away by the whirlwind and storm of ambition) they ought to place before their eyes; not only that general description of the world, that *all is vanity, and vexation of Spirit;* but also that more special one, namely, that existence itself, separated from well-being, is a curse, and the grander the existence, the greater the curse; and that the amplest reward of virtue is virtue itself; Just as also the ultimate punishment of vice is vice itself; as the Poet excellently [says],
   *What rewards, what worthy ones, men, for these praises,*
      *can I deem capable of being paid to you? The most beautiful first,*
   *the gods and your own character will give; —————*
and conversely, no less truly, he [says] of the wicked, and their own character will avenge them. Furthermore, mortals, while they stir and spread their thoughts in all directions, so that their fortunes may be rightly provided for and consulted, meanwhile, in the midst of those mental excursions, they ought to lift their eyes to divine judgments and eternal providence: which very often overturns the machinations and wicked plans of the impious, however deep, and reduces them to nothing; according to that [passage] of Scripture, *He conceived iniquity, and will bring forth vanity.* Indeed, even if they abstain from injustices and evil arts: nevertheless, this constant and restless panting after the heights of fortune, without cessation, and as it were without a Sabbath, by no means pays the tribute of our time due to God: Who, as is evident, [requires] the tithes of our faculties, but of time

--- Page 565 ---
L I B E R VIII. 543
but the sevenths, He demands and sets aside for Himself. For what purpose would it be to bear one's face raised towards the heights of heaven, but one's mind prostrate on the ground, and eating dust like a serpent? Which even the pagans did not fail to notice;
   _And fastens to the ground a Particle of the_
      _Divine Breath._
But if anyone flatters himself in this, that he has decided to use his fortune rightly, however he may have obtained it by evil arts: as it was accustomed to be said of Augustus Caesar and Septimius Severus, _They ought either never to have been born, or never to have died; so many evils they committed in the pursuit of their fortune, so many good things, on the other hand, having attained the highest power, they conferred:_ let him understand nevertheless, that this compensation of evils by good deeds is approved after the fact, but a counsel of this kind is deservedly condemned. Finally, it will not be amiss for us, in this excited and fervent pursuit of our fortune, to sprinkle a little cold water, drawn from that not inelegant saying of Emperor Charles V, in his Institutions

--- Page 566 ---
544 ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
philosophy, however, commands something similar: *First*
*seek the Goods of the mind; the rest will either be present, or will*
*not harm.* Although this foundation, laid by human hands, is sometimes
placed upon sand, as can be seen in Marcus Brutus, who, at his
death, burst forth into that cry;
*I cultivated you, virtue, as a reality: but you are an empty*
*name;*
But the same *foundation*, divinely placed, is always made firm upon *rock*.
Here, however, we conclude the *doctrine concerning the pursuit of life*, and
at the same time the *general doctrine concerning affairs*.

CHAPTER III.

*The Divisions of the Doctrine concerning Empire or the Commonwealth are omitted;*
*Only an Approach is made to two Desiderata, the Doctrine*
*concerning the Extension of the Bounds of Empire, and the Doctrine*
*concerning Universal Justice, or concerning the Sources of Law.*

I come now to the *art of governance*, or the *doctrine*
*concerning the administration of the Commonwealth*: Under which
*Household Management* is also contained, just as the *family* is under
the *state*. In this part, as I have already said before,
I have imposed silence upon myself. Nor, however, ought I to have
entirely despaired that I might perhaps discourse on it not
unskillfully or unprofitably: seeing that I have been taught by long
experience, and through so many degrees of offices and honors to the
highest Magistracy of the Kingdom, having been raised, by the most
indulgent favor of Your Majesty, by no merit of my own, and having
held the same Magistracy for four full years: and what is more,

--- Page 567 ---
LIBER. VIII. 545
is, that I have been accustomed to your Majesty's commands and conversations for eighteen continuous years; (which could also have carved out a statesman from some block of wood:) and who also, among all studies, have spent a great deal of time in Histories and Laws. All these things I do not relate to posterity boastfully, but because I think it pertains somewhat to the dignity of letters, that some man, born for letters rather than for anything else, and snatched away by some fate, I know not what, against his own genius, to manage affairs, nevertheless has been appointed to civil duties so honorable and arduous under a most prudent King. But, if my leisure should hereafter bring forth anything concerning politics, it will perhaps be an offspring either abortive or posthumous. Meanwhile, lest this so exalted Seat should be entirely empty, with all sciences now as it were placed on their own benches, I have decided to set forth only two portions of *civil science*, which do not pertain to the *secrets of empire*, but are of a more common nature,

--- Page 568 ---
546          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCES.
the doctrine of expansion, or the doctrine concerning the extension of the empire's boundaries, thus naming it.
     *Example of a summary treatise on extending the*
          *boundaries of empire.*
     The saying of Themistocles, applied to himself,
was certainly uncivil and boastful; but if it had
been uttered concerning others, and in general, it
would seem to embrace a truly prudent observation
and a very weighty judgment. Asked at a banquet
to play the lyre, he replied, *that he did not know how*
*to play stringed instruments, but that he could raise a*
*small town into a great city.* These words, certainly,
translated to a political sense, excellently describe
and distinguish two faculties, very different from
each other, in those who handle the helms of affairs.
For if we carefully observe the counselors of kings,
senators, and others appointed to public affairs, who
have ever existed, there will certainly be found (though
very rarely) some who are able to make a kingdom
or a state ample from small beginnings; yet they
may be very unskilled musicians. On the other hand,
very many others are wonderful artists in the *cithara*
or *lyre* (that is, in courtly trifles), who are so far
from being able to *amplify the commonwealth*, that
they rather seem by nature prepared to undermine
and overthrow a happy and flourishing state of the
commonwealth. Truly, those degenerate arts and
deceptions, by which counselors and powerful men
very often gain both favor with their princes and
renown among the populace, deserve no other name
than a certain skill in playing stringed instruments,
                                                                      inasmuch as

--- Page 569 ---
L I B E R VIII. 547
inasmuch as these things are more pleasing at present, and an ornament to the artists themselves, than they are useful or suitable for the wealth and greatness of the Republics, whose ministers they are. Doubtless there will also be other Councillors and Governors of the Republic, by no means to be scorned, who are equal to the tasks and can manage affairs conveniently, and preserve them from obvious dangers and disadvantages; yet they are a long way from that virtue which builds up and enlarges republics.

But, whatever kind of workers they may ultimately be, let us cast our eyes upon the work itself; namely, what the true *Greatness of Kingdoms and Republics* ought to be considered, and by what arts it can be obtained: A subject truly worthy for princes to always have in their hands and diligently meditate upon; by which they may neither, overestimating their strength, involve themselves in vain and overly arduous undertakings; nor again, despising them more than is right, descend to pusillanimous and timid counsels.

The *Greatness of Empires*, as to mass and territory, is subject to measurement; as to revenues, to calculations. The number of citizens, and heads, by census; the multitude and greatness of cities and towns can be recorded in tables. Yet among civil matters, no thing is found more prone to error than to ascertain the true and intrinsic value concerning the strength and resources of any empire. The *kingdom of heaven* is likened not to an acorn, or to some larger nut, but to a *grain of mustard seed*, which among seeds

--- Page 570 ---
548          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
among grains is the smallest, which nevertheless has within
itself a certain property and innate spirit, by which it raises itself
more quickly and spreads more widely: In the same way, one finds Kingdoms and
States, indeed very ample in extent and tract of regions,
which nevertheless are less apt for *further extending their borders*;
or for ruling more widely; Others, on the contrary, of sufficiently small
dimension, which nevertheless can be bases upon which the greatest Monar-
chies may be built.
     1. Fortified cities, full armories, noble breeds of
horses, armed chariots, elephants, machines and all kinds of war
engines, and similar things, are certainly all these nothing
other than a sheep clothed in a lion's skin, unless
the nation itself, by its stock and character, is strong and
military. Indeed, nor does the mere number of troops
help much, where the soldiers are unwarlike and
cowardly. For rightly says Virgil;
—— *The wolf cares not for the number of sheep.*
The army of the Persians in the plains of Arbela was presented to the eyes
of the Macedonians as a vast sea of men,
so much so that Alexander's Generals,
somewhat struck by the spectacle itself, interrupted the King,
and advised him to engage in battle by night:
To whom he said, *'I do not wish to steal a victory.'*
Tigranes the Armenian was also more confident in this
opinion, having encamped on a certain hill with an army of four
hundred thousand. When he saw the Roman battle line,
which did not exceed fourteen thousand,
advancing against him, he said in that famous jest of his, to himself
                                                            com-

--- Page 571 ---
LIBER VIII. 549
pleased him; "Behold," he said, "men for an em-
bassy far more than is fitting; for battle far
less." Nevertheless, before the sun had set, he
found those same ones numerous enough to utterly
defeat him with immense slaughter. There are
innumerable examples of how unequal is the clash
of multitude with fortitude. First, therefore, let it
be decided and established as a most certain and
thoroughly investigated matter, that the chief point
of all things pertaining to the greatness of a kingdom
or state is, that the people themselves be warlike
by stock and by nature. And that saying, more
common than true, that money is the sinews of war,
holds only if the sinews of physical strength are
lacking in a soft and effeminate nation. For Solon
rightly replied to Croesus boasting of his gold: "But
if anyone (O King) should come who bears iron
better than you, to him assuredly all this gold will
yield." Wherefore, whoever he may be, Prince or
State, whose native and indigenous subjects are not
spirited and military, let him estimate his power
very soberly: And conversely, Princes who rule
over spirited and martial nations, let them know
their strength sufficiently, if other things do not fail
them. As for mercenary troops (which is usually
employed as a remedy when native forces are lacking),
history is full of examples by which it is clearly
evident that whatever state relies on them will
perhaps be able to spread wings, for a short time,
larger than its nest, but they will fall off a little later.
2. The blessing of Judah and Issachar will never
come together into one: Namely, that the same

--- Page 572 ---
550          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
the same Tribe or Nation, be at the same time, both a Lion's cub, and an Ass lying down among burdens. Nor will it ever happen that a people oppressed by taxes should be strong and warlike. It is true that contributions made by public consent depress and deject the spirits of subjects less than those which are imposed by mere command. This is clearly to be seen in the taxes of Lower Germany, which they call excises: and on the other hand in those which are called subsidies among the English. For it is to be noted that the discussion is now about the spirits of men, not about wealth. But taxes, which are contributed by consent, and which are imposed by command, although they are the same thing as far as exhausting wealth is concerned, yet they affect the spirits of subjects entirely differently. Let this therefore also be established, that a people burdened by taxes is not fit to rule.

     3. For Kingdoms and States aspiring to greatness, it is absolutely to be avoided that Nobles and Patricians, and (whom we call) Gentlemen, should be excessively multiplied. For this leads to the result that the common people of the Kingdom are humble and abject; and almost nothing else than the bondmen and laborers of the Nobles. We see something similar happen in coppice woods; where, if a greater number of trunks or larger trees than is proper is left, the wood will not regenerate purely and cleanly; but the greater part will degenerate into thorns and bushes. In the same way, in nations where the nobility is more numerous than is just, the common people will be vile and idle: and ultimately the situation will come to this, that neither

--- Page 573 ---
L I B E R VIII. 551

nor will even one in a hundred be fit to bear a helmet: especially if you consider the infantry; which army is generally the principal strength. Hence will follow a large population, but meager forces. Nowhere in the world has this which I say been more clearly proven than by the examples of England and France. Of which, England, although far inferior in territory and number of inhabitants, nevertheless almost always obtained the upper hand in wars: for this very reason, that among the English, farmers and men of the lower order are fit for military service, which the peasants of France are not. In this matter, it was devised by King Henry VII of England with a certain wonderful and profound wisdom (as we have treated more fully in his *History of Life*) that smaller estates and farmhouses should be established, which should have a certain and moderate measure of land annexed to them, which could not be alienated, to the end that it might suffice for a more liberal sustenance; and that agriculture should be practiced by those who were owners of the land, or at least usufructuaries, not hired laborers or mercenaries. For only thus will any region deserve that character with which Virgil distinguished ancient Italy:
—— *A land mighty in arms, and rich in soil.*
Nor should that part of the people be passed over, (which is almost peculiar to England, nor elsewhere (as far as I know) in use, unless perhaps among the Poles) namely the servants of the *nobles*: For even the lower ranks of this class, as regards infantry, are not at all inferior to the farmers themselves.

--- Page 574 ---
552          Oɴ ᴛʜᴇ Aᴅᴠᴀɴᴄᴇᴍᴇɴᴛ ᴏғ Lᴇᴀʀɴɪɴɢ.
yield. Therefore it is most certain that that magnificence and hospitable splendor, and numerous servants, and as it were, a large retinue, which are customary among Nobles and Gentlemen in England, are especially conducive to military power; whereas, on the contrary, the obscure and more private way of life of Nobles, withdrawn into themselves, diminishes military forces.

   4. Every effort must be made, that that tree *of Monarchy, such as Nebuchadnezzar's was, should have a sufficiently ample and robust Trunk to sustain its branches and leaves: That is, that the number of natives, for restraining foreign subjects, should amply suffice. Therefore, those states are well-prepared for the greatness of empire, who easily and willingly grant citizenship rights.* For it would indeed be a vain opinion, that a handful of men, however much they excel in spirit and counsel, could restrain and curb with the yoke of empire regions excessively vast and spacious. They might perhaps do this for a time, but this matter does not achieve permanence. *The Spartans* were sparing and difficult in admitting new citizens. Hence, as long as they ruled within small limits, their affairs were firm and stable. But after they began to extend their borders and to rule more widely than the Spartan stock could conveniently restrain the multitude of foreigners by their rule, their power suddenly collapsed. No Republic ever so profusely opened its bosom for receiving new citizens as the *Roman Republic.* And so it was fitting, for such a prudent institution, that fortune, when into empire
                                                                    empire

--- Page 575 ---
L I B E R VIII. 553
...the most ample in the whole world grew up.
It was their custom to readily grant *the right of citizenship*: and that in the highest degree: That is, not only *the right of commerce, the right of marriage, the right of inheritance*; but also *the right of suffrage, and the right of petition*, or of holding offices: And this again, they communicated not only to individual persons, but to entire families, indeed to cities, and sometimes to whole nations. To this add the custom *of founding colonies*, by which Roman stock was transplanted into foreign soil. If you combine these two institutions, you will certainly say that the Romans did not spread themselves over the whole world: but rather that the whole world spread itself over the Romans: Which is the most secure method of extending empire. One often comes to wonder at *the Spanish empire*; that with so few natives it could embrace and restrain so many Kingdoms and Provinces. But certainly Spain itself ought to be considered a sufficiently large trunk for the tree, since it contains a far wider tract of regions than had fallen to Rome or Sparta in their beginnings. Furthermore, although the Spanish are accustomed to impart *the right of citizenship* quite sparingly, they do what is next best; Namely, they promiscuously admit men of any nation to their ordinary military service. Moreover, they not infrequently entrust the supreme command in war to leaders who are not Spanish by birth. However, they themselves also seem not so long ago to have felt that very scarcity of natives, and to have wished to remedy it; as appears from the *pra-gmatic sanction*

--- Page 576 ---
554          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
pragmatic sanction, promulgated this year, can
be seen.
     5. It is most certain that *sedentary mechanical*
*arts*, which are practiced not outdoors, but under a roof,
and *delicate manufactures* (which require the finger
rather than the arm) are by their nature contrary
to military spirits. In general, warlike peoples delight in leisure, and dread
dangers less than labors. And in this their natural
disposition, they are not to be greatly repressed,
if it is our desire to preserve their spirits in vigor.
Therefore, it was of great help to Sparta,
Athens, Rome, and other ancient republics,
that they had for the most part not *freemen*, but
*slaves*, by whose labors such
crafts were carried out. But the use of slaves,
after the reception of the Christian law, has for the most
part fallen into disuse. From this, therefore, the next
thing is that these arts should be permitted only to foreigners;
who for that reason are to be attracted, or
at least easily received. But the *common people* of the
*natives* ought to consist of three kinds of men;
namely, of *farmers*: *free servants*: and
*artisans*; whose work demands strength and manly
sinews; such as are *blacksmiths*, *stone-*
*cutters*, *carpenters*, and similar trades; not counting
the *enlisted military*.
     6. Above all, it contributes to the *greatness of an empire*
that some nation should profess the *study of arms*
as its glory, and as its primary institution of
life, and held in highest honor. For what
has been said by us thus far, pertains to the abili-
                                                                    ties

--- Page 577 ---
L I B E R VIII. 555
abilities only regard arms: But what good
is ability, if one does not apply oneself to the thing itself, so that it may be
brought into action? Romulus, (as they narrate,
or feign) after he had departed from the living, bequeathed that
to his citizens, that above all they should cultivate military
affairs, whence their city might rise to be the head of the world. The entire
fabric of the Spartan empire (not too prudently indeed, but
diligently nevertheless) was composed and constructed
to that end and purpose, that its citizens should be warriors
against the Persians and Macedonians. The same institution
existed, but not so constant or lasting.
The Britons, Gauls, Germans, Goths, Saxons,
Normans, and some others, also for a time
especially devoted themselves to arms. The Turks, stimulated
not a little by their law, retain the same
institution today, but with a great decline of their military
(as it now is). In Christian Europe,
the people who still retain and profess that,
are only the Spanish. But the matter is so clear and
manifest, that everyone makes the most progress
in that to which he devotes the most study, that it
needs no words. Let it suffice to have hinted, that it is utterly
to be despaired of for any nation which does not openly
cultivate arms and military service, and especially
devote itself and apply itself to them, that any remarkable
greatness of empire will, as it were, spontaneously come to it:
On the other hand, it is a most certain oracle of time,
that those nations which have remained longer in the profession
and study of arms (which the Romans and Turks especially did)
make wonderful progress in expanding their empire.
                                                                  Indeed

--- Page 578 ---
556          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCES.
Moreover, even those [nations] which flourished by military glory for
only the space of one century; yet from that, in that single
century, they attained such a greatness of empire
which for a long time afterwards, even with that military discipline
relaxed, they retained.
       7. Akin to the preceding precept is this: *That any*
*state should use such laws and customs which may furnish it*
*with just causes, or at least pretexts, for taking up arms, as if readily*
*available.* For such is the apprehension of justice inherent in the minds
of men, that they abstain from waging war (which
so many calamities follow) unless for a grave cause,
or at least a specious one. For the Turks, a cause for war is always
at hand and at their beck and call; namely, the propagation of their law and sect. The Romans,
although it was considered a great honor for their Emperors
if they had extended the boundaries of their empire,
yet for this sole

--- Page 579 ---
557
cause, they never undertook war.
But always either having suffered injury, or about to defend allies, or finally to obtain a certain security or advantage for their empire, they declared war. Therefore, if any state may not suffice to itself, but may seek supplies from elsewhere, or if its neighbors may be too powerful, or if its state's boundaries may not be natural, or if there may be some inherent sectarian dissension, or if it may have foreign subjects, or if it may have some right over neighboring provinces, or if it may have *a certain conformity of states, or a tacit correspondence*, with some neighbors, or if it may have *to some state the amplitude of empire* its own, or *natural or political* right to some protection, or if there may be some inherent sectarian dissension, or without exercise *health* its own may be able to maintain. And just as the human body, without diseases,
or some *war*, or *wholesome
exercise's* turn, never arrives to maintain its *health*:
So neither any state, without just
causes of war, or at least pretexts,
arrives at the increase of its empire's *magnitude*.
Insofar as to any state's
prosperity, *of magnitude* doubtless
it is important, that it may be as if always in arms,
and prepared for war. But if
there may be any state, which in perpetual peace
may wish to live, and may awaken itself from every occasion
of war, that one doubtless
prepares

--- Page 580 ---
"straits"
"we"
"Europeans"
"anywhere"
"yielded"
"summits"
"simplicity-"

"remarkably"

"*Council*"
"*Themistoclean*"
"*is*"
"*Islands*"
"*Curzolan*"

**Previous page text for continuity:**

*a certain conformity or tacit correspondence of states*
*to some state the greatness of empire*
*natural or political*
*health-*
*war*
*of healthy exercise*
*of greatness*

--- Page 581 ---
L I B E R VIII. 559
...are not near, but for the most part surrounded by sea; furthermore, because the treasures and riches of both Indies exist as a kind of accessory to the dominion of the Sea.

10. Modern wars can be considered as if fought in darkness, compared to the varied glory and honor which, in ancient times, used to accrue to military men from warlike deeds. Today we have, perhaps for inspiring spirits, certain honorary military orders, which nevertheless have now become common to both military and civilian life. Also, we have some coats of arms on family shields; furthermore, certain public hospitals intended for veteran and disabled soldiers, and suchlike. But among the Ancients, there were trophies erected in places where victories were won; funeral orations, and magnificent monuments for those falling in war. The civic crown, military crowns, granted to individuals. The very name of Imperator; which afterwards the greatest Kings borrowed from military commanders; celebrated triumphs of returning commanders, after wars successfully concluded. Donations, and immense largesses to soldiers; upon the disbanding of armies. These (I say) were so many and so great, and gleaming with such remarkable splendor, that they could inject sparks into the breasts of mortals, even those most frozen, and inflame them for war. But above all, that custom of triumphing among the Romans was not a matter of mere pomp, or some empty spectacle, but truly to be counted among the most prudent and noble institutions. Inasmuch as it contained these three...

--- Page 582 ---
560      On the Advancement of Learning.
it had three things; the honor and glory of the Generals; the enrichment of the treasury from spoils, and gifts for the soldiers. But perhaps the honor of a triumph is not suitable for Monarchies, except in the persons of the king himself, or the king's sons. This also held true in the times of the Roman Emperors; who reserved the honor of the triumph itself, for themselves and their sons, for wars which they themselves had personally conducted, as a special privilege: but they granted only the triumphal robes and insignia to other Generals.
    But, to conclude these remarks; No one is there (as Sacred Scripture testifies) who by anxious thought can add one cubit to his stature; that is, in the small measure of the human body: But, in the great fabric of Kingdoms and Commonwealths, to enlarge empire and extend its boundaries, is in the power of Kings and Rulers. For by wisely introducing laws, institutions, and customs, such as we have already proposed, and others similar to these, they will have sown the seeds of greatness for posterity and future ages. But these counsels are rarely considered by Princes, but the matter is usually committed to fortune.
    And these are the things we had to say, which occur to us at present concerning the extension of the empire's boundaries. But to what purpose is this discussion; since the Roman Monarchy is to be (as is believed) the last among earthly ones? Unless it be that for us, faithful to our purpose, and nowhere deviating from the path, (inasmuch as the amplification of empire has been the third among the three offices of Politics) that must by no means be omit-

--- Page 583 ---
LIBER VIII. 561
to omit that entirely. There now remains the other *desired* thing out of those two which we have set forth, namely, concerning *Universal Justice, or the sources of law.*
Those who have written about *Laws*, all have treated that subject either as *Philosophers* or as *Jurists*. And *Philosophers* propose many things, beautiful in theory, but remote from practice. Jurists, however, bound and devoted to the tenets of the laws of their own country, or even Roman or Pontifical laws, do not employ sincere judgment, but speak as if from chains. Certainly, this knowledge properly belongs to civil men: who best know what human society requires, what the welfare of the people, what natural equity, what the customs of nations, what the diverse forms of Republics; and therefore can decide concerning *laws*, from the principles and precepts, both of natural equity and of politics.
Wherefore, let this now be done, that the *sources of justice, and of public utility,* may be sought, and in each *part of law a certain character and idea of justice may be exhibited,* by which the *Laws* of particular kingdoms and Republics may be tested, and from that (standard) anyone, to whom this shall be a matter of heart and care, may be able to undertake amendment. Therefore, of this matter, in our manner, we shall propose an *example, in the title*.

Bb 3 Exem-

--- Page 584 ---
562          On the Advancement of Learning.
_________________________________________________

An Example of a *Treatise on Universal Justice*,
     or on the Sources of Law, in one Title,
               by Aphorisms.

          P R O E M.

               Aphorism I.
**I**N civil society, either law or force prevails. But
there is also a certain force simulating law: and some
law savouring more of force than of the equity of
right. Therefore, the source of injustice is threefold: mere force;
malicious ensnarement under pretext of law; and the harshness
of the law itself.

               Aphorism 2.
The foundation of private law is this. He who
commits an injury gains utility or pleasure from the deed,
but danger from the precedent. Others are not partakers
of that utility or pleasure, but they consider the example
to pertain to themselves. Therefore, they easily come together in
agreement, that they may be protected by laws; lest injuries
by turns revert to individuals. But if, by reason
of the times, and a community of guilt, it should happen
that, by some law, more danger is created for the many
and the more powerful than is provided against, a faction dissolves
the law; Which also often happens.

               Aphorism 3.
But private law lies hidden under the protection of public law.
For law protects citizens, Magistrates protect Laws.
But the authority of Magistrates depends on the ma-
jesty of the empire, and the structure of the Polity, and the
Fundamental Laws. Wherefore, if from that quarter, *soundness*

--- Page 585 ---
LIBER VIII. 563
soundness, and a right constitution, Laws will be in good use; but if not, there will be little protection in them.

Aphorism 4.
However, public law does not look only to this, that it be added as a guardian to private law, lest that be violated, and injuries cease; but it extends also to religion, and arms, and discipline, and adornments, and wealth, finally, to all things concerning the well-being of the State.

Aphorism 5.
For the end and scope which laws ought to regard, and to which they ought to direct their commands and sanctions, is no other than that citizens may live happily. This will happen if they are rightly instructed in piety and religion; honorable in morals; safe by arms against external enemies; protected by the aid of laws against seditions and private injuries; obedient to government and magistrates; and rich and flourishing in resources and wealth. But the instruments and sinews of these things are Laws.

Aphorism 6.
And the best laws achieve this end; but most of them deviate. For laws differ remarkably among themselves, and by a very great interval: so that some excel, others are mediocre, and others are entirely faulty. Therefore, according to the measure of our judgment, we will dictate certain laws, as it were, of laws; from which information can be sought as to what in individual laws has been well or wrongly placed or constituted.

Bb 4 Apho-

--- Page 586 ---
564          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
               Aphorism 7.
  *Before, however, we come to the very body of particular*
*laws: we will briefly touch upon the virtues and dignities of*
*Laws in general. A good Law can be considered one which is*
*certain in its notification, just in its precept, convenient in its*
*execution; congruent with the form of government, and generating*
*virtue in its subjects.*

               T I T L E   I.
       On the first Dignity of Laws, that
                   they be certain.
               Aphorism 8.
  *It is so important for a Law to be certain, that without*
*this it cannot even be just. For if the trumpet gives an uncertain*
*sound, who will prepare himself for battle? Similarly, if the*
*Law gives an uncertain sound, who will prepare himself for*
*obedience? Therefore, it must warn before it strikes. Also, that*
*is rightly stated: The best Law is that which leaves least to the*
Judge's *discretion: This is what its certainty provides.*
               Aphorism 9.
  *There is a twofold uncertainty of laws: one, where no law*
*is prescribed: the other, where it is ambiguous and obscure.*
*Therefore, we must first speak of cases omitted by law; so that*
*in these too some rule of certainty may be found.*
       On Cases omitted by Law.
               Aphorism 10.
  *The narrowness of human prudence, all cases,*
                                          which

--- Page 587 ---
LIBER VIII. 565
which time discovers, it cannot encompass. Not rarely, therefore, omitted and new cases present themselves. In such cases, a threefold remedy, or supplement, is applied: either by proceeding to similar cases; or by the use of examples, even if they have not coalesced into law; or by jurisdictions, which decide according to the discretion of a good man, and according to sound judgment, whether those courts be Praetorian or Censorian.

Concerning proceeding to similar cases, and extensions of laws.

Aphorism 11.
In omitted cases, the norm of law is to be deduced from similar cases, but cautiously and with judgment. Regarding which, the following Rules are to be observed. Reason is prolific; custom should be sterile, and not generate cases. Therefore, what has been received contrary to the reason of law, or even where its Reason is obscure, is not to be drawn to a consequence.

Aphorism 12.
A significant public good attracts omitted cases to itself. Wherefore, when any Law notably and in a greater manner regards and promotes the advantages of the Commonwealth, its interpretation should be extensive and amplifying.

Aphorism 13.
It is harsh to torture Laws, so that they may torture men. It is not pleasing, therefore, to extend penal Laws, much less Capital ones, to new offenses. But if the crime be old, and known to the laws, but its prosecution falls into a new case, not provided for by the Laws; let it be entirely departed from
Bb 5

--- Page 588 ---
566          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
one should depart from the dictates of the law, rather than offenses remain unpunished.
          Aphorism 14.
  In Statutes which plainly abrogate the Common Law (especially concerning those matters which frequently occur and have long been established), it is not advisable to proceed by analogy to omitted cases. For when the State has entirely lacked a law, and that in expressed cases, there is little danger if omitted cases await a remedy from a new Statute.
          Aphorism 15.
  Statutes which were manifestly laws of their time, and born from the then prevailing circumstances of the State; when the reason of the times has changed, they are sufficient if they can sustain themselves in their own cases: but it would be preposterous if they were drawn in any way to omitted cases.
          Aphorism 16.
  A consequence is not consequence: but extension ought to be stopped within proximate cases: Otherwise it will gradually slide to dissimilar cases, and the subtleties of intellects will prevail more than the authorities of laws.
          Aphorism 17.
  In Laws and Statutes of a briefer style, extension is to be made more freely. But in those which are enumerative of particular cases, more cautiously. For just as an exception strengthens the force of the Law in cases not excepted, so enumeration weakens it in cases not enumerated.
          Aphorism 18.
  An explanatory statute closes the channels of the prior

--- Page 589 ---
LIBER VIII. 567
of the former; nor is extension subsequently admitted in either statute. Nor should a super-extension be made by the Judge, where once an extension has begun to be made by the Law.
Aphorism 19.
The solemnity of words and acts does not admit of extension to similar cases. For that which passes from custom to discretion loses its solemn nature: And the introduction of new things corrupts the majesty of the old.
Aphorism 20.
The extension of Law to cases arising subsequently, which did not exist in the nature of things at the time the Law was enacted, is readily made. For either the case could not be expressed, because it did not then exist, or the omitted case is held to be expressed, if the reason was similar.
And concerning the extensions of Laws in omitted cases, let these things have been said: Now we must speak of the use of examples.
Concerning examples, and their use.
Aphorism 21.
Now we must speak of examples, from which Law is to be drawn, where the Law is deficient. But concerning custom, which is a species of Law, and concerning examples which, through frequent use, have passed into custom, as if a tacit Law, we will speak in their proper place. Now, however, we speak of examples which occur rarely and sparsely, and have not coalesced into the force of Law, when, and with what caution, a rule of Law is to be sought from them, when the Law is deficient.
Aphorism 22.
Examples are to be sought from good and moderate times.
Bb 6

--- Page 590 ---
568          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
must be sought, not from tyrannical, or factious, or dissolute ones. Examples of this kind are spurious offspring of time, and do more harm than good.
          Aphorism 23.
  In examples, more recent ones are to be considered safer. For what was done a little while ago, from which no inconvenience followed, why should it not be repeated again? But nevertheless, recent examples have less authority. And if perchance it is necessary for things to be restored for the better, recent examples savor more of their own age, than of right reason.
          Aphorism 24.
  But older examples are to be received cautiously and with selection: For the passage of time changes many things, so that what seems old in time, that, by disturbance and shapelessness in relation to present circumstances, may be plainly new. Therefore, examples from the middle period are best, or even of such a time that greatly agrees with the current time; by which sometimes a more remote time is preferable, rather than one in the immediate past.
          Aphorism 25.
  Confine yourself within the bounds of the example, or rather, around it, and do not exceed them in any way. For where the norm of the Law is not present, all things are to be held as suspect. Therefore, as in obscure matters, follow the minimum.
          Aphorism 26.
  Beware of fragments and summaries of examples: and the entire example, and its whole process, must be examined. For if it is improper to judge concerning a part of the Law unless the whole Law has been thoroughly examined,

--- Page 591 ---
L I B E R VIII. 569
to judge, much more ought this to hold true in e-
xamples: which are of doubtful use, unless they fit very
well.

Aphorism 27.
In examples, it matters greatly through whose
hands they have passed, and by whom they have been transacted. For if they have obtained only among
scribes and ministers of justice, in the ordinary course
of the court, without the manifest knowledge of Superiors,
or even among the people, the master of errors;
they are to be trampled underfoot and held in little regard.
But if among Senators, or Judges, or principal
courts, they have been placed so secretly, that it was
necessary for them to have been fortified by the approval
of the Judges, at least tacitly, they have more dignity.

Aphorism 28.
To examples which have been published, however
little they may have been in use, since nevertheless they have been
agitated and ventilated by the discussions and debates of men,
more authority is to be attributed. But those which have remained
in chests and archives as if buried, and have openly passed into oblivion,
less. For examples, like water, are healthiest in flowing.

Aphorism 29.
Examples which pertain to laws, it is not pleasing that they be
sought from Historians; but from public acts and more diligent
traditions. For a certain infelicity exists among even the best
historians, that they do not sufficiently dwell on laws
and judicial acts; or if perchance they have applied some diligence;
nevertheless they vary widely from the authentic sources.
Apho-

--- Page 592 ---
570          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
               Aphorism 30.
   An example, which the contemporary or
nearest age rejects, even when the case might recur
from time to time, is not easily to be admitted. For it does not
weigh so much in its favor, that men sometimes
used it; as against it, that those who experienced it
abandoned it.
               Aphorism 31.
   Examples are employed for counsel, they certainly
do not command, or order. Therefore let them be governed
in such a way, that the authority of past time may be bent to the
use of the present.
   And concerning information from examples, where
the law fails, let these things have been said. Now we must speak of
praetorian and censorial courts.
      On praetorian and censorial courts.
               Aphorism 32.
   Let there be courts and jurisdictions, which decide
by the discretion of a good man, and sound judgment, where
the rule of law fails. For law, (as has been said
before) is not sufficient for [all] cases; but is adapted to those things which usually
happen. But time is the wisest thing, (as has been said
by the ancients) and daily author, and inventor of new cases.
               Aphorism 33.
   However, new cases arise both in criminal
matters, which require punishment, and in civil matters, which
require aid. The courts which pertain to the former, we call
censorial; those which pertain to the latter, praetorian.
               Aphorism 34.
   Let censorial courts have jurisdiction and power

--- Page 593 ---
LIBER VIII. 571.
power, not only to punish new offenses, but also to increase the penalties established by laws for old offenses, if the cases are odious and enormous, provided they are not capital. For an enormous case is like a new one.
Aphorisism 35.
Similarly, let the praetorian courts have the power, both to relieve against the rigor of the law, and to supply the defect of the law. For if a remedy ought to be extended to him whom the law has overlooked, much more to him whom it has wounded.
Aphorisism 36.
Let these censorial and praetorian courts confine themselves entirely within enormous and extraordinary cases, and not invade ordinary jurisdictions; lest perchance the matter tend to the subversion of the law, rather than to its supplementation.
Aphorisism 37.
Let these jurisdictions reside only in the supreme courts, and not be communicated to inferior ones. For the power of supplying, or extending, or moderating laws is little short of the power of making laws.
Aphorisism 38.
But let not those courts be committed to one man, but let them consist of several. Nor let Decrees issue in silence; but let the judges adduce the reasons for their sentence, and that openly, and with the crowd present: so that what is free by its very power, may nevertheless be circumscribed by reputation and public opinion.
Aphorisism 39.
Let there be no rubrics of blood; nor concerning capital matters, in any courts whatsoever, except by a known and certain law.

--- Page 594 ---
572          On the Advancement of Learning.
certain, pronouncement. God Himself first decreed death:
afterwards He inflicted it. Nor is life to be taken away except from him
who knew himself to have previously committed a capital offense.
               Aphorism 40.
  In Censorian Courts, let a third vote be given,
so that Judges are not imposed with the necessity, either of
acquitting, or of condemning; but also that they may be able
to pronounce 'not clear'. Also, let the censorian [judgment] be not
only a penalty, but also a mark: Namely, one which
does not inflict capital punishment, but either ends in an
admonition, or chastises the matter with light ignominy and as it were
with a blush.
               Aphorism 41.
  In Censorian Courts, of all great
crimes, and wicked deeds, acts begun, and intermediate
acts, are punished, even if the consummated effect does not
follow: And let this be the very greatest use of those courts:
since it concerns both severity, that the beginnings
of crimes be punished; and clemency, that their perpetration
(by punishing intermediate acts) be intercepted.
               Aphorism 42.
  It must be especially guarded against, lest in Praetorian Courts
aid be offered in cases which the Law not
so much omitted, as despised as trivial, or
judged unworthy of remedy as odious.
               Aphorism 43.
  Above all, it concerns the certainty of laws
(of which we are now treating) that Praetorian Courts do not
swell up and overflow to such an extent, that under the pretext of
mitigating the rigor of laws, they even cut into or
loosen their strength and sinews; by drawing everything to
arbitrary judgment.

                                             Apho-

--- Page 595 ---
LIBER VIII. 573
Aphorism 44.
Praetorian courts shall not have the right to decide against an express statute under any pretext of equity. For if this were to happen, the judge would entirely transform into a lawgiver, and everything would depend on arbitrary judgment.
Aphorism 45.
Among some, it is accepted that the jurisdiction which decides according to what is fair and good, and that other one which proceeds according to strict law, be assigned to the same courts; but among others, that they be assigned to different ones; the separation of courts is entirely preferred. For the distinction of cases will not be preserved if there is a mixing of jurisdictions; instead, arbitrary judgment will eventually dictate the law.
Aphorism 46.
Not without reason had the Praetor's album come into use among the Romans, in which he prescribed and published how he himself would administer justice. By which example, judges in Praetorian courts ought to propose certain rules for themselves (as far as possible) and publicly affix them. For the best law is that which leaves least to the judge's discretion; the best judge is he who leaves least to himself.
But we will treat more fully of these courts when we come to the section on judgments; we have spoken of them only incidentally now, insofar as they expedite and supply what is omitted by law.
On the Retroactivity of Laws.
Aphorism 47.
There is also another kind of supplement for omitted cases, when one law supersedes another, and at the same time draws in the omitted cases. This happens in laws, or statutes,

--- Page 596 ---
574          On the Advancement of Learning.
tutes, which are retrospective, as they commonly say. Laws of this kind are rarely, and with great caution, to be applied: for Janus is not pleasing in laws.
               Aphorism 48.
   He who, by trickery and fraud, evades and circumvents the words or the meaning of a law, is worthy to be ensnared by a subsequent law. Therefore, in cases of fraud and deceitful evasion, it is just that laws be retrospective, and that they be mutual aids to one another; so that he who devises frauds and the subversion of present laws, may at least fear future ones.
               Aphorism 49.
   Laws which strengthen and confirm the true intentions of acts and instruments against defects of forms or solemnities, most rightly embrace past matters. For the chief fault of a law which is retrospective is that it disturbs. But laws of this confirmatory kind aim at the peace and stability of those things which have been transacted. However, care must be taken lest settled judgments be overturned.
               Aphorism 50.
   It must be diligently observed lest those laws only be thought to look to the past which invalidate past acts: but also those which prohibit and restrict future things, when necessarily connected with past things. For example, if some law forbids certain artisans from selling their wares in the future: this applies to the future, but operates on the past: For it is no longer open to them to seek a livelihood by another means.
                                                  Apho-

--- Page 597 ---
L I B E R VIII. 575

Aphorism 51.
Every declaratory law, although it does not have words concerning the past, is nevertheless, by the very force of the declaration, entirely drawn to past matters. For interpretation does not then begin when it is declared, but it is made as if contemporary with the law itself. Therefore, do not ordain declaratory laws, except in cases where laws can look back with justice.

Here indeed we conclude that part which treats of the uncertainty of laws where no law is found. Now we must speak of that other part, where, namely, some law exists, but it is perplexing and obscure.

On the obscurity of laws.
Aphorism 52.
The obscurity of laws derives its origin from four things: either from an excessive accumulation of laws, especially with obsolete ones mixed in; or from their ambiguous, or less clear and lucid description; or from neglected or poorly established methods of elucidating the law; or finally, from the contradiction and vacillation of judgments.

On the excessive accumulation of laws.
Aphorism 53.
The Prophet says; "He will rain snares upon them." But there are no worse snares than the snares of laws, especially penal ones; if, immense in number and useless in the course of time, they do not provide a lamp for the feet, but rather cast nets.

Aphorism 54.
A twofold method of enacting a new statute comes into use. One, previous statutes concerning the same subject.

--- Page 598 ---
576          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
confirms and strengthens; then adds or changes some things. The other abrogates and deletes all things that were previously ordained, and entirely substitutes a new and uniform law. The latter method is preferred. For by the former method, ordinances become complicated and perplexing: and what is urgent, is indeed dealt with, but the body of laws is meanwhile rendered defective. In the latter, however, greater diligence must certainly be applied, while the law itself is being considered; And previous acts must certainly be reviewed and weighed, before the law is passed: But by this, the harmony of laws in the future proceeds optimally.
               Aphorism 55.
  It was customary among the Athenians that conflicting heads of laws (which they call antinomies) should be examined annually by six men, and those which could not be reconciled should be proposed to the people, so that something certain might be decided concerning them. Following their example, those who have the power of enacting laws in individual Polities should review antinomies every three or five years, or as it shall seem fit. These, moreover, should first be inspected and prepared by men delegated for this purpose, and finally presented to the Assemblies, so that what is approved may be established and fixed by votes.
               Aphorism 56.
  Nor indeed should there be too diligent or anxious a care for reconciling conflicting heads of laws, and (as they say) saving everything, through subtle and far-fetched distinctions. For this is a snare of ingenuity: And however much it may present a certain modesty and reverence, it must nevertheless be reckoned among harmful things;

--- Page 599 ---
LIBER VIII. 577
is to be considered; inasmuch as it renders the entire body of laws varied and ill-stitched. It is altogether better that the worse (laws) succumb, and the better (laws) stand alone.

Aphorism 57.
Obsolete laws, and those which have fallen into disuse, no less than antinomies, should be proposed (for removal), to be abolished by delegates ex officio. For since an express statute is not regularly abrogated by disuse, it happens that from the contempt of obsolete laws, some loss of authority occurs even in the remaining (laws): And that kind of torment of Mezentius follows, that living Laws perish in the embrace of dead ones. And altogether, gangrene in laws must be avoided.

Aphorism 58.
Moreover, in obsolete laws and statutes, and not (those) newly promulgated; let the praetorian courts have the right, in the interim, to decide against them. For although it has been not badly said, that no one ought to be wiser than the laws, nevertheless, let this be understood of laws when they are awake, not when they are slumbering. Against more recent statutes, however (which are found to harm public right), not indeed to praetors, but to kings and more sacred councils, and supreme powers, let the right of offering assistance belong: suspending their execution by edicts or acts, until the assemblies return, or such gatherings, which have the power to abrogate them; lest the safety of the people be endangered in the interim.

Dene-

--- Page 600 ---
578          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
               On new digests of laws.
                    Aphorism 59.
   But if laws accumulated one upon another,
have grown into such vast volumes, or have labored under such great
confusion, that to revise them completely,
and to reduce them into a sound and manageable body, is
expedient; do that above all things, and let such a
work be a heroic work: And the authors of such a
work are rightly and deservedly numbered among legislators and restorers.
                    Aphorism 60.
   This kind of purification of laws, and a new
digest, is accomplished by five things. First, let
obsolete laws be omitted, which Justinian calls "ancient
fables." Next, from among the antinomies, let the
most approved be received, and the contrary ones be abolished. Third, let homoeonomies,
or laws which sound the same, and are nothing else than repetitions of the same thing,
be expunged; and let one of them, which
is most perfect, be retained in place of all.
Fourth,

--- Page 601 ---
LIBER VIII. 579
in the administration of justice, the interpretation and administration of common law and statutes. This is what Trebonianus did in the Digest and Code.

Aphorism 62.
Truly, in this kind of regeneration of laws, and new structure of old laws and books, I entirely retain the words and text of the law, even if it was necessary to excerpt them through fragments and small portions: These are then woven together in order. For even if perhaps more conveniently, and also, if you regard right reason, this could be better accomplished through a new text, than through such a patchwork; nevertheless, in laws, not so much style and description, as authority, and its patron antiquity, must be regarded. Otherwise, such a work might seem rather something scholastic, and a method, than a body of commanding laws.

Aphorism 63.
It would be advisable that in the new digest of laws, the old volumes not be entirely destroyed, and fall into oblivion, but at least remain in libraries; even if their common and indiscriminate use is prohibited. For in more serious cases, it would not be without purpose to consult and inspect the changes and series of past laws; and certainly it is customary to sprinkle antiquity upon present matters. Moreover, such a new body of laws must be entirely confirmed by those who have legislative power in individual polities: lest perchance, under the pretext of digesting old laws, new laws be secretly imposed.

Apho-

--- Page 602 ---
580    ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
Aphorism 64.
It were to be wished that such a restoration of laws
be undertaken in those times which have excelled in learning and
knowledge of things compared to the older ones whose acts and works they treat.
The opposite of which happened in the work of Justinian. For it is an
unfortunate matter when, from the judgment and selection of an age less prudent
and learned, the works of the ancients are mutilated and
recomposed. Nevertheless, that which is not the best is often
necessary.
And concerning the obscurity of laws, which arises from their excessive and
confused accumulation, let these things have been said.
Now we must speak concerning their ambiguous and obscure description.
Concerning the perplexed and obscure description of laws.
Aphorism 65.
Obscure description of laws arises either from their
loquacity and verbosity; or again from excessive
brevity; or from the prologue of the law conflicting with the body
of the law itself.
Aphorism 66.
But concerning the obscurity of laws which arises from their
faulty description, we must now speak. Loquacity, which
comes into use in writing laws, and prolixity, is not approved.
For it does not in any way achieve what it wants and desires, but rather
the opposite. For when it strives to pursue and express
individual particular cases with appropriate and proper words,
hoping for greater certainty therefrom; on the contrary, it gives birth to
multiple questions about the words; so that interpretation according
to the meaning of the law (which is sounder
and truer/more correct —

--- Page 603 ---
L I B E R VIII. 581
and truer) because of the noise of words.
Aphorism 67.
Nor, for that reason, is excessively concise and affected brevity to be approved, for the sake of majesty, and as if more imperious; especially in these ages, lest perchance the law be like a Lesbian rule. Moderation, therefore, must be sought; and a well-defined generality of words must be sought out; which, although it does not diligently pursue the cases comprehended, yet it sufficiently and clearly delimits the comprehended cases.
Aphorism 68.
In ordinary and political laws and edicts, however, in which, for the most part, no one employs a jurist, but trusts to his own understanding, all things ought to be explained more fully, and shown to the grasp of the common people, as if with a finger.
Aphorism 69.
Nor indeed would the prologues of laws, which were once considered inept, and which introduce laws as disputing, not commanding, please us, if we could bear ancient customs. But these prologues of laws are for the most part (as times now are) necessarily employed, not so much for the explanation of the law, as by way of persuasion, for carrying the law in the assemblies. And again, for satisfying the people. As far as possible, however, prologues should be avoided, and the law should begin with a command.
Aphorism 70.
The intention and meaning of a law, although it may sometimes be not badly elicited from prefaces and preambles (as they say); nevertheless, its breadth or extension ought by no means to be sought from them. For often the preamble seizes upon some things from the most plausible
                               Cc

--- Page 604 ---
582        ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
sible and specious instances as an example, although the law neverthe-
less embraces many more things: Or on the contrary, the law
restricts and limits several things, the reason for which limita-
tion it was not necessary to insert in the preamble.
Therefore, the dimension and breadth of the law must be sought from the
body of the law itself. For the preamble often falls either
beyond or short of it.
                Aphorism 71.
  There is indeed a very faulty kind of drafting laws.
When, namely, the case at which the law aims,
is diffusely expressed in the preamble, from which the preamble
is inserted and incorporated into the law itself: Which is both
obscure and less safe: because the same
diligence is not accustomed to be used in weighing and
examining the words of the preamble, as is used
in the body of the law itself.
  This part concerning the uncertainty of laws, which
arises from their poor description, we will
discuss more fully when we later deal with the interpretation of
laws. And concerning the obscure description of
laws, let these things have been said: Now we must speak of the methods of elucidating the
law.

--- Page 605 ---
L I B E R VIII. 583
On the transcription of judgments.
Aphorism 73.
First of all, let judgments rendered in supreme and principal courts, and in more serious cases, especially doubtful ones, and which have something of difficulty or novelty, be diligently and faithfully recorded. For judgments are the anchors of laws, as laws are of the Commonwealth.
Aphorism 74.
Let the method of recording such judgments and committing them to writing be as follows. Precisely describe the case, exactly transcribe the judgments themselves. Add the reasons for the judgments which the judges brought forward. Do not mix the authority of cases adduced as examples with the principal cases. Be silent about the perorations of advocates, unless something in them was very exceptional.
Aphorism 75.
Let the persons who record such judgments be from among the most learned advocates, and let them receive a generous fee from the public treasury. Let the judges themselves abstain from such transcriptions, lest perhaps, addicted to their own opinions and relying on their own authority, they overstep the limits of a reporter.
Aphorism 76.
Arrange those judgments in order and sequence of time, not by method and titles. For such writings are like histories, or narratives of laws. And not only the acts themselves, but also their times, provide light to a prudent judge.
Cc 2 De

--- Page 606 ---
584	ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING
	On Authentic Writers.
		Aphorism 77.
   From the laws themselves, which constitute common
law; then, from constitutions or statutes;
in the third place, from written judgments, the body of law
is constituted only. Besides these, other authentic [sources]
shall either be none, or shall be sparingly received.
		Aphorism 78.
   Nothing is so important for the certainty of laws (of which
we now treat) as that authentic writings
be confined within moderate limits, and that the
enormous multitude of Authors and Doctors in
Law cease; from which the meaning of the laws is torn apart, the judge becomes
bewildered, processes become endless, and the advocate
himself, since he cannot read through and master so many
books, resorts to summaries. Perhaps some good glosses;
and from classical writers a few, or rather small portions
of a few writers, might be received as authentic.
Nevertheless, let some use of the rest remain in libraries,
so that judges or advocates may consult their treatises
when there is need; but in conducting cases, in
court it is not permitted to cite them, nor shall they pass
into authority.
	On Auxiliary Books.
		Aphorism 79.
   But let them not strip the science of law, and its practice,
of auxiliary books, but rather furnish them. These
shall be six in general categories: Institutes; On the meaning
of words; On the rules of law; Antiquities
of laws; Summaries; Forms of action.
					Apho-

--- Page 607 ---
L I B E R   V I I I.               585
          Aphorism 80.
   Young people and novices are to be prepared, through institutions, to draw and imbibe the knowledge and difficult matters of law more deeply and conveniently. Compose those institutions in a clear and perspicuous order. In those very (texts), go through the whole private law: not omitting some things, dwelling more than enough on others, but briefly sampling something from each, so that to one about to approach the reading of the body of laws, nothing may appear entirely new, but instructed by some slight notion. Do not touch public law in the institutions, but let that be drawn from the sources themselves.
          Aphorism 81.
   Prepare a commentary on legal terms. In explaining them and rendering their meaning, do not be too curious or laborious. For it is not the aim that exact definitions of words should be sought, but only explanations which may open an easier way to reading law books. A treatise

--- Page 608 ---
586      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
profound principles, which can be extracted from the harmony of laws and decided cases; such as are sometimes found in the best rubrics: and these general dictates are reasons which run through diverse matters of law, and are, as it were, the ballast of the Law.
          Aphorism 83.
  But individual points of Law, decrees or established principles, should not be understood as rules, as is often done quite unskillfully. For if this were accepted, there would be as many rules as laws. For a law is nothing else than a commanding rule. But consider those as rules which adhere to the very form of justice: whence, for the most part, almost the same rules are found throughout the civil laws of diverse Commonwealths, unless perhaps they vary due to their relation to the forms of governments.
          Aphorism 84.
  After the rule, stated in a brief and solid complex of words, let examples and decisions of cases be added, especially clear for explanation; distinctions and exceptions for limitation; related matters for the amplification of the same rule.
          Aphorism 85.
  It is rightly commanded that law should not be derived from rules, but from the law, which exists, a rule should be made. Nor indeed is proof to be sought from the words of the rule, as if it were the text of a law. For a rule indicates the law (as the nautical needle indicates the poles), it does not establish it.
          Aphorism 86.
  Besides the Body of Law itself, it will also be helpful to examine the Antiquities of Laws, though these may have vanished—

--- Page 609 ---
L I B E R VIII. 587
though their authority may have vanished, reverence nevertheless remains. As for the Antiquities of Laws, let writings concerning Laws and Judgments be considered; whether they were published or not, which preceded the Body of Law itself in time. Indeed, their loss is not to be made. Therefore, excerpt from them whatever is most useful (for many things will be found empty and frivolous) and compile them into a single volume: lest ancient Fables, as Trebonianus says, be mixed with the Laws themselves.
          Aphorism 87.
  Indeed, it is of great importance for practice that the entire Law be arranged in order into Topics and Titles; to which one may suddenly have recourse (as occasion offers), as to a storehouse prepared for present uses. Books of Summaries of this kind both arrange scattered material and abbreviate what is diffuse and prolix in the Law. But care must be taken lest these Summaries make men quick in practice, but idle in the science itself. For their function is such that law is recalled from them, not learned thoroughly. Moreover, Summaries must be compiled with great diligence, fidelity, and judgment, lest they steal from the laws.
          Aphorism 88.
  Collect diverse forms of action in each kind. For this is also important for practice; and certainly, they reveal the oracles and hidden things of the Laws. For there are not a few things that lie hidden in the laws: But in forms of action, they are perceived better and more fully, like a fist and a palm.

          Cc 4                    De

--- Page 610 ---
588      CONCERNING THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
         Concerning Responses & Consultations.
               Aphorism 89.
   Some method of resolving particular doubts, which
from time to time emerge, ought to be adopted. For
it is hard that those who wish to guard against error
should not find a guide for their path, but that the
act itself should be imperiled, nor should there be
any means of knowing the law before the deed is done.
               Aphorism 90.
   That the responses of the learned, which are given
to petitioners concerning the law, whether by Advocates
or by Doctors, should possess such great authority
that it is not lawful for a judge to depart from their
opinion, is not approved. Let legal decisions be made by
sworn judges.
               Aphorism 91.
   That judgments be tried by fictitious cases and
persons, so that in that way men may experience what
the standard of the law will be, is not approved. It
disgraces the Majesty of the Laws, and ought to be
considered as a kind of prevarication. But for judgments
to have something of the stage, is disgraceful.
               Aphorism 92.
   Therefore, let the judicial function be solely both
judgments, and responses and consultations. The former
concerning pending lawsuits; the latter concerning difficult

--- Page 611 ---
BOOK VIII. 589
assigned to them, if there be need, and they are to hear arguments from both sides, and having deliberated the matter, they are to administer justice and declare it. Consultations of this kind are to be reported and published among judgments, and they are to be of equal authority.
Concerning Lectures.
Aphorism 93.
Lectures on law, and the exercises of those who apply themselves to legal studies and give their effort, are to be so instituted and ordered, that all things tend towards settling questions and controversies of law, rather than exciting them. For a game (as it now happens) is instituted and opened among almost everyone, for multiplying altercations and questions of law, as if for the sake of displaying ingenuity. And this is an old evil. For even among the ancients it was a glory, as if through sects and factions, to foster many questions of Law rather than extinguish them. Let it be provided that this does not happen.
Concerning the Instability of Judgments.
Aphorism 94.
Judgments waver, either because of an immature and premature sentence; or because of the rivalry of the courts; or because of a bad and unskillful drafting of judgments; or because of a path provided for their too easy and expeditious rescission. Therefore, it must be provided that judgments are issued, with mature deliberation first having been held, and that courts respect each other, and that judgments are drafted faithfully and prudently: and that the way to rescind judgments,
Cc 5 be.

--- Page 612 ---
590.          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
be made narrow, rough, and as if paved with sharp stones.

               Aphorism 95.
  If a judgment shall have been rendered concerning some case
in some Principal court, and a similar case shall have
arisen in another court, do not proceed to judgment,
before a consultation takes place in some greater College
of judges. For if judgments rendered should perchance need
to be rescinded, let them at least be buried with honor.

               Aphorism 96.
  That courts should contend and clash over jurisdiction, is
something human; and all the more so, because by a certain
inept maxim (that it is the mark of a good and vigorous
judge to enlarge the jurisdiction of his court) this intemperance
is plainly nourished, and a spur is added, where a bridle is needed.
But that from this contention of minds, courts should willingly
rescind judgments rendered on both sides (which pertain nothing
to jurisdiction), is an intolerable evil, and plainly to be
redressed by Kings, or the Senate, or the State. For it is a matter
of the worst example, that Courts, which provide peace to subjects,
should engage in duels among themselves.

               Aphorism 97.
  Let not the access to rescinding judgments be easy or
prone through appeals, or petitions concerning error, or
revisions, and similar things. It is accepted among some,
that a suit be drawn to a superior forum, as if it were an
entirely new matter: the judgment given thereupon being set
aside, and plainly suspended. But among others, that the
judgment itself remains in its force, but execu-

--- Page 613 ---
LIBER VIII. 591

its execution *only ceases. Neither of these is agreeable,*
*unless the courts, in which judgment has been rendered, were*
*humble and of inferior order: But rather,*
*that both the judgment stands, and its execution proceeds:*
*provided that a guarantee be given by the defendant for damages and*
*expenses, if the judgment should be rescinded.*

And this *title concerning the Certainty of Laws*
will suffice as an example for the rest of the *Digest* (which we are
contemplating). Now indeed we have concluded *civil doctrine*
(insofar as it seemed good to us to treat it).
And along with it, *human Philosophy:*
Just as also with *human Philosophy,*
*Philosophy* in general. Therefore, finally, taking a little
breath, and casting our eyes back to those things which we have
passed over, we deem this treatise of ours not dissimilar
to those sounds and preludes which musicians try out
while tuning their strings for a melody:
Which indeed themselves present something unpleasant
and harsh to the ears: but they are the cause that all things
which follow are sweeter; Thus indeed
we have brought ourselves to apply our efforts to tuning the lyre of the
Muses, and bringing it to true harmony, so that the strings
may afterwards be struck by others with a better finger, or
plectrum. Indeed, when we place before our eyes the state of these
times, in which *letters* now seem to have returned to mortals for the third time: and
at the same time we diligently observe with what various
safeguards and aids they have now visited us, because
they are of the many intellects of our time
Cc 6 acu-

--- Page 614 ---
592 On the Advancement of Sciences.
keenness and sublimity: the exceptional trusted monuments
of ancient writers, which like so many torches to us
shine forth: the art of Printing, supplying Books to men
of every fortune with a generous hand;
the expanded gulfs of the Ocean, and the world from every
side traversed, whence very many experiments
unknown to the Ancients appeared, and a huge accumu-
lation accrued to Natural History: leisure, by which
the best minds in the Kingdoms and Provinces of Europe
everywhere abound, since men in these places are less involved in affairs
than either the Greeks, on account of popular States,
or the Romans, on account of the vastness of their Dominions,
used to be: the peace which Britannia, Hispania,
Italia, even now Gallia, and not a few other Regions enjoy at this time:
the consumption and exhaustion of all things
which seem capable of being devised or said concerning
Religious Controversies, which have long diverted so many minds
from the studies of other arts: the supreme and excellent learning of Your Majesty,
to whom (like Phoenix birds) they gather themselves
from all sides

--- Page 615 ---
**BOOK VIII. 595**

and let them consider the search for truth as a noble undertaking, not for pleasure or ornament; And let them expend wealth and magnificence on solid and excellent things, not on common and obvious ones. As for my labors, if anyone wishes to please either themselves or others in criticizing them, they will certainly present that old request of ultimate patience: *Strike, but hear.* Let men criticize as much as they please, provided they attend to and weigh what is said. An appeal will certainly be legitimate (although the matter will perhaps less need it) if it is made from the first thoughts of men to the second, and from the present age to posterity. Let us now come to that Science which those two ancient periods of time lacked (for not so great happiness was granted to them), I speak of *sacred* and *divinely inspired* Theology, the Sabbath of all human labors and wanderings, and the noblest Harbor.

[A decorative floral woodcut tailpiece]

FRAN-

--- Page 616 ---
594

# OF FRANCIS BACON
# BARON VERULAM,
# Viscount St. Alban,

### *Concerning the Dignity & Advancement*
### *of the Sciences,*

## BOOK NINE.
### *To His King.*

## CHAP. I.

*Divisions of Inspired Theology are omitted: Only*
*an approach is made to three desiderata: The Doctrine concerning the Legitimate*
*Use of Human Reason in Divine Matters: The Doctrine concerning the*
*Degrees of Unity in the City of God: & the Emanations*
*of the Scriptures.*

[Large initial J]Now indeed (O excellent King), since a small keel,
such as ours could be, has sailed around the entire
circuit, both of the old and the new World, of the Sciences,
(how [well] with favorable winds, and course, let it be the judgment
of posterity) what remains, but that, having at last fulfilled our
vows, we should pay them? But there still remains *Sacred Theology*,
or *Inspired Theology*. Nevertheless, if we proceed to treat
of it, we must depart from the *small boat of human reason*,
and pass into the *Ship of the Church*

--- Page 617 ---
L I B E R IX.                                  595
no longer the *Star of Philosophy*, which has hitherto especially shone upon us. Therefore it would be fitting to observe silence in this matter also. Wherefore we will omit *legitimate divisions* concerning it: Nevertheless, we will contribute a few things to this, according to our humble capacity, in place of offerings. We do this all the more because in the Body of Theology we have found no region or tract whatsoever that is completely deserted or uncultivated: So great has been the diligence of men in sowing either wheat or tares.
   Therefore we will propose three *Appendices to Theology*, which deal not with *matter* informed or to be informed by *Theology*, but only with the *mode of information*. Nor, however, concerning these *Treatises*, (as we have been accustomed in other matters) will we subjoin *examples* or give *precepts*. We will leave this to theologians. For those things (as we have said) are merely in the nature of offerings.
   1. The *Prerogative of God* embraces the whole man: and extends no less to *reason* than to *human will*: so that man indeed may entirely deny himself, and approach God. Wherefore, just as we are bound to obey the *Divine Law*, although *will* may resist, so also to have faith in the *Word of God*, although *reason* may resist. For indeed, if we believe only those things which are agreeable to our *reason*, we assent to the things themselves, not to the *author*: Which we are accustomed to grant even to witnesses of suspect credibility. But that *Faith*, which *was imputed to Abraham for righteousness*, was concerning a matter of this kind, which *Sarah* held in derision: Which in this part ima-

--- Page 618 ---
596          On the Advancement of Learning.
...was a certain image of natural reason. Therefore, the more absurd and incredible a *Divine Mystery* is, the more honor is shown to God in *believing* it, and the more noble the *victory of faith* becomes. Even sinners, the more their conscience burdens them, and nevertheless they place their Faith concerning their salvation in God's Mercy, the more they honor God: for all *Despair* is an insult to God. Moreover, if we carefully consider the matter, what is more worthy than to believe, than to *know* in the way we now *know*. For in *Knowledge*, the human mind is affected by the senses, which recoil from material things; but in *Faith*, the soul is affected by the soul, which is a more worthy Agent. The matter is different in the *State of Glory*: For then *Faith* will indeed cease, and we shall know, *even as we are known*.
     Let us conclude, therefore, that *Sacred Theology* ought to be drawn from the *Word and Oracles of God*, not from the *light of nature*, or the *dictate of reason*. For it is written, *The heavens declare the glory of God*: But nowhere is it found written, *The heavens declare the will of God*. Concerning that [will], it is declared, *To the Law and to the Testimony: if they speak not according to this word*, etc. Nor does this hold true only for *those great Mysteries* concerning the Godhead, Creation, Redemption; but it also pertains to the more perfect interpretation of the Moral Law; *Love your enemies; Do good to those who hate you*, etc. *That you may be children of your Father who is in heaven, who rains upon the Just and Unjust*. Which words certainly deserve that applause; *Nor voice of man-*

--- Page 619 ---
**BOOK IX. 597**
sounds human. Indeed, it is a voice that surpasses the light of nature. Moreover, we see pagan poets, especially when they speak passionately, not infrequently protest against moral laws and doctrines (which nevertheless are much more indulgent and less strict than divine laws), as if they resist the liberty of nature with a certain malice:
—— *And what nature allows,*
*Envious laws deny.* ——
Thus Dendamis the Indian, to Alexander's messengers: *That he had indeed heard something of the name of Pythagoras, and of other wise men from Greece; and that he believed them to have been great men; but to have suffered from that fault, namely, that they had held in excessive reverence and veneration some fantastic thing, which they called Law and Custom.* Wherefore, nor is it to be doubted that a great part of the moral Law is more sublime than to where the light of nature can ascend. Nevertheless, what is said, that men have, even from the light and law of nature, some notions of virtue, vice, justice, injustice, good, evil; that is most true. It must be noted, however, that the light of nature is understood in a twofold sense. Firstly, inasmuch as it arises from sense, induction, reason, arguments, according to the laws of heaven and earth: Secondly, inasmuch as it shines internally upon the human soul by instinct, according to the law of conscience, which is a certain spark, and as it were the remnants of pristine and primitive purity. In which latter sense the soul is especially a partaker of light

--- Page 620 ---
598          ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
of some light, for contemplating and discerning the perfection of *moral law*; Which light, however, is not entirely clear, but such that it rather reproves vices to some extent, than fully informs about duties. Therefore, *Religion*, whether you consider its Mysteries or its morals, depends on *Divine revelation.*

     Yet the *use of human reason* in spiritual matters, certainly exists in many forms, and extends very widely. For it is not without cause that the Apostle called Religion a *Rational Worship of God.* Let one recall the ceremonies and types of the old Law. *Those were Rational and Significant*, far different from the ceremonies of idolatry and magic, which were as if deaf and mute, teaching nothing for the most part, indeed not even hinting at anything. Especially *Christian faith*, as in all things, so in this very thing it excels, in that it preserves a golden mean concerning the *use of reason and disputation* (which is the offspring of reason) between the Laws of the Gentiles and of Mahomet, which pursue extremes. For the Religion of the Gentiles had nothing of constant Faith or Confession; on the contrary, in the Religion of Mahomet, all disputation is forbidden: so that the one bears the face of vague and manifold error; the other, of a certain cunning and cautious imposture; while holy *Christian Faith both accepts and rejects the use of reason and disputation* (but according to due limits).

     The *use of human reason*, in matters pertaining to *Religion*, is twofold: one, in the *explanation of My-*

--- Page 621 ---
LIBER IX. 599

...stery, the other, in the *inferences* which are deduced therefrom. As far as the *explanation of Mysteries* is concerned, we see that *God* does not disdain to lower Himself to the weakness of our understanding; explaining His *mysteries* in such a way that they can be best perceived by us; and, as it were, inoculating His *revelations* into the *preconceptions* and notions of our *reason*; and accommodating His *inspirations* to open our intellect, just as the shape of a key is fitted to the shape of a lock. In this respect, however, we ourselves ought by no means to be lacking. For since *God* Himself uses the works of our *reason* in His *illuminations*, we also ought to turn it in all directions, so that we may be more capable of receiving and imbibing *Mysteries*. Provided that the mind, according to its measure, is expanded to the amplitude of *Mysteries*, not that *Mysteries* be confined to the narrowness of the mind.

As for the *inferences*, however, we ought to know that the use of *reason* and *reasoning* is left to us (as regards *Mysteries*) as something secondary and *relative*, not primitive and absolute. For after the *articles* and *principles of Religion* have already been placed in their proper seats, so that they are entirely exempt from the examination of *reason*, then and only then is it permitted to derive and deduce *inferences* from them, according to their analogy. Indeed, this does not hold true in *natural things*. For even the *principles* themselves are subjected to examination; by *induction*, I say; though by no means by *Syllogism*: And those very things have no connection with reason

--- Page 622 ---
600        On the Advancement of Learning.
repugnance with reason, so that both the primary propositions and the intermediate ones are deduced from the same source.
It is otherwise in *Religion*; where both the primary propositions are self-subsistent, and subsisting by themselves; and again, they are not governed by that reason which deduces consequent propositions. Nor, however, does this happen in *Religion* alone, but also in other *Sciences*, both more serious and lighter, where, namely, the primary propositions are *assumptions*, not *posited*: Since in those too, the absolute use of reason cannot exist. For we see in *Games*, for instance, *Chess*, or similar ones, that the primary rules and laws of the Game are merely positive and arbitrary; which must absolutely be accepted, not called into question: But to win, and skillfully conduct the game, that is artful and rational: In the same way it is also in *Human Laws*: In which there are not a few *Maxims*, (as they say) that is, mere *Tenets of Law*, which rest more on *Authority* than on reason; Nor do they come into dispute; But what is most just, not absolutely, but relatively; (that is, by analogy with those *Maxims*; ) that finally is rational, and offers a wide field for disputation. Such, therefore, is *that secondary reason*, which has a place in *Sacred Theology*, which, namely, is founded upon the *Decrees of God*.
    But just as the use of human reason in *Divine matters* is twofold; so also in the same *use* there is a twofold excess. One, when a *Mystery* is inquired into more curiously than is proper. The other, when, in *inferences*...

--- Page 623 ---
L I B E R IX. 601
authority is attributed to inferences, and to principles themselves. For he might seem a disciple of Nicodemus who too stubbornly asks; How can a man be born when he is old? And he can by no means be considered a disciple of Paul, who does not sometimes insert into his doctrines, "I, not the Lord:" Or that, "According to my counsel." Indeed, to most inferences, this style will be appropriate. Therefore, it seems to us a salutary thing, and especially useful, if a sober and diligent treatise were instituted, which would usefully instruct concerning the use of human reason in theological matters, as a kind of Divine Dialectic. Inasmuch as it would be like a kind of Opiate Medicine, which not only lulls to sleep the empty speculations with which the school sometimes labors, but also somewhat mitigates the furies of controversies, which stir up tumults in the Church. We place such a treatise among our desiderata; and we name it *Sophron*, or *Concerning the Legitimate Use of Human Reason in Divine Matters*.

    2. It greatly concerns the peace of the Church, that the covenant of Christians, prescribed by the Savior in those two Chapters, which seem somewhat divergent, be well and clearly explained: Of which one defines thus; "He who is not with us, is against us:" The other, however, thus; "He who is not against us: is with us." From these it is clearly evident, that there are some articles in which he who dissents must be placed outside the covenant: but others, in which it is permitted to dissent, with the covenant preserved. For the bonds of Christian communion are established as, One Faith, One Baptism, etc. Not one rite, one

--- Page 624 ---
602      On the Advancement of Learning.
one opinion. We also see that the Savior's tunic was seamless; but the Church's garment is many-colored. Chaff in the ear must be separated from the grain; but tares in the field are not to be immediately uprooted. Moses, when he found an Egyptian contending with an Israelite, did not say, "Why are you contending?" But drawing his sword, he killed the Egyptian: But when he saw two Israelites contending, although it could not be that a just cause belonged to both, yet he addressed them thus: "You are brothers, why are you contending?" Therefore, having weighed these things, it seems to be a matter of great moment and utility that it be defined what those things are, and of what breadth, which utterly tear men from the body of the Church, and cut them off from the Communion of the faithful. But if anyone thinks that this has already been done long ago, let him consider again and again how sincerely and moderately. Meanwhile, it is probable that he who mentions Peace will receive that reply of Jehu to the Messenger, ("Is it peace, Jehu?") "What have you to do with peace? Turn behind me and follow me:" since not peace, but factions are dear to most. Nevertheless, it has seemed good to us to place a Treatise on the Degrees of Unity in the City of God among the things desired, as salutary and useful.
   3. Since the Sacred Scriptures have such great parts in shaping Theology, their Interpretation must first be considered. Nor do we now speak of the Authority to interpret them, which is established in the consensus of the Church, but of the method of interpreting. This is twofold; Methodical,

--- Page 625 ---
L I B E R IX. 603
...cal, and *Loose*. For indeed, these Divine streams, which infinitely surpass those waters from Jacob's wells, are drawn and presented in almost similar ways as natural waters usually are from wells: These, indeed, are either received into cisterns upon the first drawing, from where they can be conveniently distributed for use through many pipes; or they are immediately poured into vessels, to be used as needed, from time to time. And *that former methodical mode* *finally gave birth to Scholastic Theology for us;* *through which the Doctrine of Theology was collected into an art, as into a cistern;* *and from there streams of Axioms and Positions were distributed into all parts.* But in the *Loose* mode of Interpreting, two excesses occur. The first, *presupposes such a Perfection in the Scriptures,* that even all Philosophy ought to be sought from their sources, as if any other Philosophy were a profane and heathen thing. This intemperance prevailed especially in the school of Paracelsus, and also among others: its beginnings, however, are from the Rabbis and

--- Page 626 ---
604      ON THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
to seek in *Theology* is nothing else than *to seek*
*the dead among the living*. But the other *mode of*
*Interpreting* (which we establish as an excess) seems
at first glance sober and chaste; but nevertheless it
both dishonors the *Scriptures* themselves, and afflicts
the *Church* with great detriment. It is (to speak
briefly) when *Scriptures divinely inspired* are
explained in the same way as *human writings*.
But it is necessary to remember that to God, the *Author*
*of the Scriptures*, those two things are open, which human
intellects escape: namely, the *secrets of the heart*, and
the *successions of time*. Wherefore, since the *dictates*
*of the Scriptures* are such that they are written to the heart,
and *embrace the vicissitudes of all ages*;
since [they are written] with eternal and certain foreknowledge
of all heresies, contradictions, and
the varied and changeable state of the Church, both in
general, and in individual elect ones; they are not to be
interpreted only according to the breadth
and obvious sense of the passage: or by looking to the
occasion from which the words were uttered: or
precisely from the context of the preceding and
following words: or by contemplating the principal
aim of the saying; But in such a way, that we understand
them to embrace, not only totally, or collectively,
but distributively; even in individual clauses and words,
innumerable streams and veins of doctrine
for irrigating the individual parts of the Church, and the souls of the faithful.
For it has been excellently observed, that the
*Responses of our Savior*, to not a few questions,
from those which were proposed, do not seem to be
to the point, but as if impertinent. Of which
                                                                          thing

--- Page 627 ---
BOOK IX. 605
the reason for this is twofold; One, because when He had known the
thoughts of those who were asking, not from
words, as we humans are accustomed, but imme-
diately and directly from themselves, He responded to their
thoughts, not to their words: The other, because
He spoke not only to those who were then present,
but also to us who live, and to people of all ages
and places, to whom the Gospel shall be preached.
This also holds true in other places of Scripture.
Therefore, these preliminary remarks having been made, let us come to that
treatise which we have determined to be lacking. Indeed,
among theological writings, there are found far too many books of
controversies: The theology of the kind
which we called positive, is a huge mass. Commonplaces;
Special treatises; Cases of Conscience;
Sermons and homilies; Finally, very many
lengthy commentaries on the Books of Scriptures.
What we desire, however, is of this kind:
namely, a succinct, sound, and judicious collection
of annotations and observations,
upon particular texts of Scripture; by no means
straying into commonplaces, or
pursuing controversies, or reducing them to the method
of art, but such as are plainly scattered
and native. This is certainly a thing that sometimes shows itself in more
learned sermons, which for the most part
do not endure; but which has not yet
coalesced into books that might pass down to posterity. Certainly,
just as wines that flow gently at the first pressing
are sweeter than those that are squeezed
by the press; because these are from
the grape pit.

--- Page 628 ---
606 Dᴇ Aᴜɢᴍ. Sᴄɪᴇɴᴛ.
...from the grape and skin of the grape have a taste of something. Similarly, doctrines are very wholesome and sweet which emanate from Scriptures gently drawn out, and do not lead to Controversies or Commonplaces. We will name a treatise of this kind *Emanations of the Scriptures*.

Now therefore I seem to have completed, as faithfully as I could, a small globe of the *intellectual world*; together with the designation and description of those parts which, by the industry and labors of men, I find either not constantly occupied or not sufficiently cultivated. In which work, if anywhere I have departed from the opinion of the ancients, let it be understood that this was done with the intention *of advancing for the better, not of innovating, or migrating to something else.* For I could not be consistent with myself, or with the argument I have in hand, unless I had plainly resolved to add to *the inventions of others*, as much as was in my power; although I have no less wished that *my own inventions* also be surpassed by others in the future. How fair I have been in this matter appears even from this: that I have everywhere proposed my opinions naked and unarmed, nor have I contended to prejudice the liberty of others by pugnacious refutations. For in those things which have been rightly set forth by me, there is hope that it will happen that if a doubt or objection arises in the first reading, yet in a repeated reading the answer will spontaneously present itself. But in those things in which it happened to me to err, I am certain that no violence has been inflicted by me upon the truth through contentious arguments: Of which [arguments] such is almost the natu-

--- Page 629 ---
L I B E R IX.                                  607
nature, that they lend authority to errors, and detract from rightly discovered things. For indeed, error gains honor from doubt; Truth suffers rejection. Meanwhile, there came to my mind that reply of Themistocles, who, when a certain Ambassador from a small town had delivered some grand speeches, rebuked the man; *Friend, your words lack a City.* Certainly, I believe it can be most justly objected to me, that my words *require an Age.* *Perhaps an entire Age,* to prove, but several *Ages* to perfect. Nevertheless, since even the greatest things owe their existence to their beginnings, it will be enough for me to have sown for posterity, and for the immortal God: Whose Divine Power I humbly implore, through His Son and our Savior, that He would graciously deign to accept these, and similar ones, *victims of human intellect,* sprinkled with Religion, as with Salt, and offered to His Glory.

[A decorative woodcut tailpiece featuring symmetrical floral and scroll motifs]

                                Dd 2                      NO-

--- Page 630 ---
[Decorative woodcut headpiece with floral scrolls and two faces]

NEW WORLD OF SCIEN-
CES, OR DESI-
DERATA.

B O O K. II.

Errors of nature, or History of pretergenerations.
Bonds of nature, or mechanical history.
Inductive history, or natural history in
order to establish Philosophy.
The Eye of Polyphemus, or history of letters.
History for Prophecies.
Philosophy according to ancient parables.

B O O K. III.

First Philosophy, or concerning the common axioms of the sciences.
Living Astronomy.
Sound Astrology.
Continuation of natural problems.
Tenets of ancient Philosophers.
Part of Metaphysics concerning the forms of things.
Natural Magic, or the deduction of forms to
works.
Inventory of human resources.
Catalog of Polychrests.

B O O K.

--- Page 631 ---
L I B. IV.
Triumphs of Man, or concerning the highest points of human nature.
Physiognomy of the body in motion. Medical Narratives.
Comparative Anatomy.
Concerning the cure of diseases held to be incurable.
Concerning external Euthanasia.
Concerning authentic medicines.
Imitation of natural hot springs.
Medical Thread.
Concerning prolonging the course of life.
Concerning the substance of the sensible soul.
Concerning the strivings of the spirit in voluntary motion.
Concerning the difference between perception and sensation.
The Root of Perspective, or concerning the form of light.
L I B. V.
Learned Experience, or Pan's Hunt.
New Organon.
Particular Topics.
Refutations of Idols.
Concerning the analogy of demonstrations.
L I B. VI.
Concerning the marks of things.
Philosophizing Grammar.
The Handing Down of the Lamp, or a method for sons.
Concerning the prudence of private discourse.
Colors of apparent good and evil, both simple and comparative.
Antitheses of things.
Minor forms of speeches.

Dd 3                                        LIB.

--- Page 632 ---
L I B. VII.
Serious Satire, or concerning the inner nature of things.
Georgics of the mind, or concerning the cultivation of morals.
L I B. VIII.
The Amanuensis of Life, or concerning scattered opportunities.
The Smith of Fortune, or concerning the scope of life.
The Cloaked Consul, or concerning extending the empire's
	boundaries.
The Idea of Universal Justice, or concerning the sources of law.
L I B. IX.
Sophron, or concerning the legitimate use of human reason
	in divine matters.
Irenaeus, or concerning the degrees of unity in the City
	of God.
Heavenly Wineskins, or emanations of the scriptures.

[A decorative floral ornament featuring a central flower and symmetrical scrolling foliage]

I N-

--- Page 633 ---
I N D E X
Of Things & Words.

A.

Aaron the orator. 365
Abel & Cain, an image of two lives. 57
A closer union of academies is very use-
ful. 100
Academic and Sceptic philosophers. 297
The most excellent philosophy of the Academics, according to
Cicero. 375
The doctrine of Acatalepsy. 297
Accent of words. 348
The acroamatic style of speaking brought into disrepute. 358
Theatrical performances are most useful. 145
Actions for expanding learning, concerning how many
subjects they revolve. 91
The usefulness of theatrical performances. 425
Solemnities of actions/ceremonies. 124
The sharp penetrates more strongly than the blunt.
371
Nautical needle, compass. 304
Easy access, and an affable countenance. 476
What wonder properly is. 10
Wonder regards God, knowledge regards creatures.
ibid.
Wonder, the seed of knowledge. 9
Hadrian, an investigator of secrets. 68
Flattery harms the dignity of learning. 31
To form the parts of a building is one thing, to join them together is another. 447
Dd 4 Egyp-

--- Page 634 ---
**INDEX OF SUBJECTS**
*To the Egyptians very many arts owe their beginning.* 293
*The Egyptians, most ancient teachers.* 58
*Egypt had seven fertile years, as many barren.* 475
*Rivals and equals to be considered.* 524
*Riddles disgraced.* 358
*Their use and purposes.* ibid.
*Equivocations are the sophisms of sophisms.* 328
*Why Circe was given as a sister to Aesculapius by poets.* 248
*Assessment of forces necessary for war.* 168
*Vain affectations.* 34
*No one described the passions better than poets and*
*historians.* 461
*Even buried passions resurface.* 174, 175
*Passions never rest.* 175
*Untamed, they are like tigers.* ibid.
*Deformed and crude.* ibid.
*They desire that which experience has rejected.* 176
*Like ivy.* ibid.
*They run riot in religions.* 176, 177
*They are a brief madness.* 177
*They do not tolerate inquiry and admonition.* ib.
*How passions differ from reason.* 368
*More vehement passions are of ambiguous sex.* 174
*Agent and patient.* 440
*Agesilaus' saying concerning Pharnazus.* 25
*Excessive cheerfulness to be restrained.* 522
*The praetor's album among the Romans.* 573
*Alchemy has much fantasy.* 44
*Alchemists and Paracelsus are refuted.* 246
*Alexander envied Homer as a herald for Achilles.* 69, 70 Alexan-

--- Page 635 ---
**AND OF WORDS.**
Alexander taught by Aristotle, Callisthenes, and others. 69
Alexander censured Cassander, secretly hated Callisthenes. 71, 72
Alexander mocked flatterers. 70
He censured Antipater and Parmenion. 72, 73
Alexander the Great. 13
Alexander did not want to steal victory. 73 & 548
Alexander, the greatest logician. 71
rhetorician. 72
statesman. 73
Saying of Alexander Borgia. 233
Alexander's expedition in Asia. 48
Alexander's judgment concerning Darius's casket. 70
Reproving letter sent to Aristotle. ib.
(His) learning, in which he prefers to excel more than in empire. ib.
Apophthegm against Diogenes. ibid.
Reign of Alexander Severus. 15
Algebra. 232
Common secret alphabet. 348
Vain altercations. 34
Ignorance of amanuenses. 353
To love and to be wise. 102
How ambiguities are to be removed. 582
Ambition, the plague of men. 443
Let friends fall, provided that enemies perish. 541
Friends, thieves of time. 477
Let friends stir each other. 504
With whom friendship is to be formed for the inquiry into minds. 520, 521
Let the choice of friends be prudent. 502
The leniency of friends in admonishing is criticized. 504 D d 5 Amne-

--- Page 636 ---
INDEX OF THINGS

*Amnesty.* 503
*Love & desire, harmony of things.* 161
*Love shapes character best.* 470
*Heresy of the Anabaptists.* 437
*Analytics.* 325
*Simple & comparative anatomy.* 254
*Anatomy of the living.* 256
*Patience of Anaxarchus.* 238
*Particle of the divine aura of the soul.* 543
*Faculties of the soul.* 276
*The sensible soul is not entelechy.* 281
*Angels fell.* 470
*Nature of Angels & Spirits neither inscrutable*
	*nor forbidden.* 187
	*veneration prohibited.* ibid.
*Nature of Angels closest to God.* 55
*Orders of Angels.* 56
*The English are warlike.* 551
*The soul of brutes is a corporeal substance.* 276
*Doctrine of the human soul.* 273
*Excellence of the human soul above the souls of bru-*
	*tes.* 274
*Substance of the rational soul.* 275
*Two emanations of souls.* 273
*The worthier the soul, the more it suffers.* 492
*Goods of the mind to be sought first.* 544
*Cultivation of the mind.* 454
*Need for amendment of the mind.* 535
*The minds of men are found now in a more perfect, now in a worse*
	*state.* 467
*By what key the minds of men are to be unlocked.* 517, 518
*The door of the mind are the eyes, mouth, countenance, gestures.* 516
	*Of the mind*

--- Page 637 ---
ET OF WORDS.
To restrain the impulse of the mind, the greatest thing. 439
Vexation and restlessness of the mind. 472
The human mind like a mirror. 7
The human mind strives not to be in suspense. 324
A truly sound and strong mind. 439
How the mind is to be directed. 532
How annals differ from diaries. 134, 135
Antinomy. 576
Heresy of the Anthropomorphites. -331
Antiquity, how far it is to be retained. 192
What antiquities are. 124
The study of antiquity and novelty. 46
Reverence for antiquity. 47
Antichrist, the greatest impostor of all ages.
151
Various antitheses of things. from page 392 up to page
418
The vice of Antoninus Pius to be avoided. 363
Antony called a "cumin splitter". 68
Anytus, accuser of Socrates. 12
Bees. 294
From where aphorisms are to be compiled. 359
Two kinds of appetites. 208
Apophthegms, the axes and spears of words.
142
Apotheosis. 64
Water placed at the highest point. 303
Water has more weight than wine. 310
Salt water shines at night. 285
Aqueduct, for what purpose devised. 91
Secrets can be difficult to conceal. 517
Archias, a good poet. 237, 238
Dd 6 Archi-

--- Page 638 ---
**INDEX OF SUBJECTS**

Archimedes' discovery. 310
*Architecture.* 447
*How quicksilver is stupefied.* 303
Aristippus fell at Dionysius' feet. 32
Aristotle *did not note affections in ethics.* 460
*his discussions about pleasure & pain.* 461
Aristotle, Alexander's teacher. 69
Aristotle praises Democritus while disparaging him. 361.
Aristotle is criticized because he coined new terms for the arts. 191
*of admirable genius, but ambitious. ibid.*
Aristotle similar to the Ottomans. 212
*is commended.* 213
*is accused.* 220
Aristotle is refuted. 314
Aristotle's *history of animals.* 43
Aristotle's rivalry towards rhetoricians. 365
Aristotle's view on custom is rejected. 462, 463
Aristotle's view on virtue. 454
*Arithmetic.* 231
*How art differs from nature, and artificial things from natural ones.* 107 & seq.
*Art of judgment.* 299
*Art supplies nature.* 252
*Art without use is to be valued little.* 336
*many examples of useless arts are presented.* *ibid.*
*What arts accomplish.* 11
*Arts of invention develop.* 317
*Arts soften morals.* 20
*Arts*

--- Page 639 ---
**INDEX OF THINGS**

AND OF WORDS.
*Liberal arts flourish, being placed in the highest position.* 272
*Four logical arts.* 290
*Arts are wrongly condemned.* 540
*Arts which pertain to sight and hearing, why*
*liberal.* 271
*The same thing happens to arts as to plants.* 357
*Articles of inquiry concerning gravity and levity.* 318
& seqq.
*No fatal necessity is inherent in the stars.* 201
*Many fictions of astrology are refuted.* 198
*namely, the rule of the planets through certain hours,*
*rule.* ibid.
*distributions of houses.* 198, 199
*doctrine concerning nativities.* 199 & seq.
*Astrology filled with many superstitions.* 198
*Astrology has much fantasy.* 44
*What should be retained in astrology.* 200
*what is lacking in it.* 201
*Sound astrology is desired.* ibid.
*how it should be constructed.* 201 & seq.
*for what purpose it should be used.* 206 & seq.
*Astronomy is compared with Prometheus.* 195
*what and how much is lacking in it.* 195
& seq.
*Astronomy and astrology differ.* 195
*Atalanta's apple.* 53
*The Athenians are blamed by Demosthenes.* 533
*Athletics.* 270
*The fable of Atlantis.* 324
*Atoms.* 151
*Atoms were not the principles of things for Democritus.*
309
Atti-

--- Page 640 ---
I N D E X O F S U B J E C T S
Atticus warns Cicero about his facial expression & gesture.
                                                                    476, 477
Custom of bird-catchers.                                               461
Augustine Donius.                                        276
Augustus was not a dissembler.                      531
   he especially reached out to the statue of Julius.           ibid.
Augustus Caesar, about to die, what he asked from his friends.
   friends.                                                         512. 513
Augustus & Septimius accomplished the greatest evils,
   evils, also good things.                                           543
Augustus lived perpetually in the eyes of men. 523
Gold is sometimes refined by fire.               108
Gold absorbs quicksilver.                  304
Gold has more weight, less dimension than
   silver has.                                         310
Gold can be produced by much & shrewd effort.
   effort.                                                               227
Authentic writers.                                     584
Auxiliary books.                                              ibid.
To make convertible axioms is the mark of an ingenious
   mind.                                                           362, 363
Various axioms.                                              180
   are applied to different sciences.             18. & seq.
   such as no one has yet composed.                   183

                                   B

Basilisk kills by its gaze.                451
Modern wars are waged in darkness.              559
Wars are not to be undertaken for a light cause.                13
   what kind of War is to be chosen                     ibid.
How the wars of the Romans were waged.                166
Cause of war.                                                      556
                                                                    propa-

--- Page 641 ---
ET OF WORDS.
propagation of law & sect.	ibid.
injury inflicted.	ibid.
aid to be sent to allies.	ibid.
Let the cause of war be just.	167
Is money the sinew of war?	535
In war, speed is most beneficial.	169
concealment of plans.	ibid.
foresight.	170
The war against Brutus & Cassius avenged
the death of Caesar: (the war of) Severus (avenged the death of) Pertinax:
(the war of) Brutus avenged the death of Lucretia. 168
The British War waged by Charles VIII, King
of France.	166
Philip and Alexander waged different wars.	ibid.
Bernardino Telesio.	276
The famous words of Bias.	539
Library.	92
Goods of mind & body rarely coincide in a person.	472
Example or image of the good.	431
The nature of positive good best described.	432
also compared.	ibid.
Relationship of goods of mind & body.	472
Active good differs from the good of communion. 442
How much the common good prevails over the individual.	435
Good of communion, or of duty.	446
Individual good.	434
Individual good, either active or passive.
	440
Passive good is divided.	443
	Good

--- Page 642 ---
INDEX OF THINGS
*Perfective good.* ibid.
*Conservative good.* 444
*One cluster of grapes ripens faster against another cluster.* 304
*The kingdom of Britain excels in naval power.* 558
*Brutus's animadversion on his sons.* 453
*Brutus's saying which he uttered at his end.* 544
*A certain Burgundian, the killer of the Prince of Orange.* 238

C
**C** *aesar to the ship's governor.* 387
*Cicero praises Caesar in person.* 450
*Caesar's books on analogy.* 343
*Caesar preferred to be first in an obscure place than second in Rome.* 530, 531
*Caesar's words to Oppius Balbus.* 100
*Shoemaker.* 314
*Calendar of doubts and falsehoods.* 212
*Heat rises.* 307
*Slander boldly, etc.* 526
*The goat, a climbing animal.* 156
*What a poem is.* 143
*Various kinds of poems.* 347 & seq.
*Meats putrefy faster in some cellars.* 310
*Emperor Charles V's saying.* 543
*Writings of Carrus and Ascamus.* 35
*Images of Cassius and Brutus.* 24
*In assaulting castles, one must not always delay.* 360
*Human prudence cannot grasp all cases.* 564, 565
*Fable of the golden chain.* 187
*Catiline, the incendiary of republics.* 541
Cato

--- Page 643 ---
ET OF WORDS.
Cato the Censor thinks Carneades should be dismissed.	12
Cato the Censor learns the Greek language.	20
Cato the Elder, the maker of his own fortune.	511
Cato's versatile genius.	532, 533
Praise given to Cato the Younger by Cicero.	455
Cato of Utica, laborious, but little to the point. 534
Physical causes do not lead man away from God and providence.	223
Inquiry into final causes is sterile.	224
An inquiry concerning respective cautions and vices is needed.	452
Speed is especially regarded in servants.	498
Celsus's opinion concerning the anatomy of the living.	256
Celsus the physician is praised.	299
A centurion in Tacitus.	238
Onion seed.	301
Cicendula.	285
Chinese characters.	341
Charity, the antidote to knowledge.	95
Charity, the bond of perfection.	469
	does not admit of excess.	470
Real Chinese characters.	341
Chiromancy, a vain thing.	241
Christ, the highest physician.	245
Chronicles.	125
Chronology.	124
Chemistry, to what it should be compared.	44
The saying of the chemists is approved.	189
The new Philosophy of the chemists.	50, 51
The fanatical phalanx of the chemists.	330
Cicero to Caesar.	386
	Cice-

--- Page 644 ---
INDEX OF THINGS
Cicero *accuses Cato.* 27
*Excuses the harsher sayings of philosophers.* ibid.
Cicero *on seeking the consulship.* 481
Cicero's *complaint about Socrates.* 235
Cicero's *oration for Marcellus.* 450
Cicero's *pursuit of eloquence.* 365
Cicero *denies that the word* (*ineptum*) *can be rendered*
*in Greek.* 345
*Unlocking of ciphers.* 353
Cipher. 348
*should be free from suspicion.* 349
Civil *science.* 474
*its three parts.* 475
*The right of citizenship to be liberally granted.* 553
*What was objected to Cleon.* 367
Celestial *bodies are moved by perfect circles.* 157
Supper, *to which Brutus, Cassius & others were invited.*
453
Knowledge *in God is original.* 55
Arrangement *in speech produces much grace.* 419
*The custom of founding colonies.* 553
Columbus's *voyage.* 48
Comines's *opinion.* 492
Comets *can be predicted.* 204
Commentaries *properly what.* 123
*To postpone (a trial) to the third day is to be avoided.* 482
*A twofold way of treating concord.* 503
Confidence *very effective for concealing de-*
*fects.* 528
Confusion *of tongues after the flood.* 58
*An unequal encounter to be avoided.* 483
Consalvi's *generous saying.* 438
Conscien-

--- Page 645 ---
ET OF WORDS.
Conscience, law. 597
To irritate consciences, serious. 485
Preservation of things, its nature. 265
Shrewd counsels, joyful in expectation. 506
Unsuccessful counsels, which are concealed by profound dissimulation. 532
Some counselors, fiddlers. 546 & seq.
some equal to business. 547
To entrust the highest matters to empirical advisors is dangerous. 14
Prudence and soundness of counsel are needed for learning. 90
Concealment of one's own plans, exploration of enemy plans, can do much in war. 169
Great force of habit. 462
Custom, a second nature. 465 & 533
Contemplation of creatures produces knowledge. 10
Theology is ignorant of the contemplative life. 436
Contemplative life to be preferred to active. 435
Of contraries, the reason is the same. 369
One must aim at the opposite. 464
Prudence in conversation. 476
Copernicus's opinion concerning the nature of the earth can be refuted. 235, 236
Mercenary forces are very powerful. 549
The internal parts of the body are as dissimilar in men as foreheads or noses. 255
The heart, like the sand of the sea. 481
Ravens. 294
Cosmetics. 269
History of creation. 55
Credulous-

--- Page 646 ---
**INDEX OF SUBJECTS**

Credulity has harmed ecclesiastical histories. 42
A credulous person willingly deceives. ibid.
Cretans are liars. 459
Criticism. 420
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;how to be handled. 421 & seq.
The rashness of certain critics. ibid.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;their disease. ibid.
Croesus showed gold to Solon. 549
Blame committed when the perpetrator is not yet known,
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;people are greatly agitated. 380
The origin of desire: apparent good. 173, 174
The Curia. 570
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;censorial and praetorian. 571
The jurisdiction of the Curia should not be extended with much
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;contention. 590
Curiosity is condemned in learned people. 34
Useless curiosity. 484
A busybody in another's affairs. 128
The art of guarding. 334
Slayers of the Hydra. 305
Cumin splitters. 363

**D**

To give is more blessed than to receive. 440
Daniel concerning the last times. 138
David's military law. 95
Tithes of possessions. 542
Deciphering. 353
Declamation against physicians. 249
Self-disclosure, how useful it is and how to be
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;practiced. 526
Let decrees be published openly. 571

--- Page 647 ---
ET OF WORDS.
How to hide defects.                      528
Deformed ones turn out happy.             530
Possession of good fame by the deceased.  487
  is neglected in this age.               ibid.
God's judgments are inscrutable.          140
  and yet described in larger characters. ibid.
God's works show His power and wis-
  dom, not His image.                     186
God's works are done by indirect means.   157
The two greatest heralds of a powerful and wise God
  are the word and the image of the world. 159
Democracy.                                557
Democritus' saying is commended.          189
Democritus' philosophy is more solid than Aristotle's and
  Plato's.                                221
Four kinds of demonstrations.             333
Demosthenes addresses his citizens.       379
Demosthenes is praised.                   537
Demosthenes' oration to the Athenians.    27
Demosthenes' diligence.                   315
Demosthenes' complaint.                   382
Demosthenes' reply to Aeschines.          19
Dendamis the Indian's reply to Alexander. 597
The secrets of the heart and the successions of time are open to God.
                                          604
Error in the purification of metals.      302
A scoffer is not to be taught.        485, 486
Scoffers destroy the republic.            490
Certain humble desires: the lyre to Nero,
  gladiatorial games to Commodus, chariot driving to An-
  tonius.                                 442
                                  Designation

--- Page 648 ---
INDEX OF MATTERS

*Public designation of suitable men to be appointed for scientific inquiry.* 101
*Despair before God is an insult.* 596
*Method of distilling.* 305
*Can closed distillation be performed?* 312
*God directs Himself to the weakness of our understanding.* 599
*God accommodates Himself to human understanding.* 296
*God demands tithes of resources, sevenths of time.* 542, 543
*God first called forth unlettered people to disseminate the faith.* 61
*God, holy, holy, holy.* 218
*God hides the word so that it may be found.* 60, 61
*The end of Dialectic.* 357
*Dialectic and rhetoric differ.* 369
*Dialectic is subservient to the intellect.* 366
*Diaries differ from annals.* 135
*how employed.* ibid.
*Dichotomy.* 388
*The day on which God rested, blessed.* 56
*Difference between an orator and a sophist.* 327
*Distrust, an error in some learned men.* 47
*New Digest.* 578
*of how many matters it consists.* ibid.
*The dignity of knowledge to be sought in the archetype.* 54, 55
*High offices corrupt the talents of men.* 459
*The fruit of diligence.* 500
*He who has begun well has half of the deed. &c.* 382
*A brilliant saying of Diogenes.* 439
*Diogenes' reply to a certain person.* 32
*The fable of Dionysius.* 172 & seq.
Diony-

--- Page 649 ---
**AND OF WORDS.**
Dionysius the elder was less evil than the younger
among the Syracusans. 374
Ancient discipline was restored. 25
What kind of loyalty pupils owe to teachers. 46
Domestic discord is harmful. 487
Discourse on history and examples. 509
    on letters. 510
Characteristics of dispositions. 457
    whence to be chosen. 457 & seq.
Concealment of errors. 530
Distribution of honors among the ancients. 64 & seq.
Divination is twofold. 277
Natural divination. 278
Most learned men, leaders of heretics. 6
Learning concerning the excellences of the human race is desired.
237
Learning concerning the exemplar. 431
Learning concerning man is twofold. 237
Learning concerning affairs. 479
Learning concerning the idols of the human mind is desired.
333
Learning begets immortality. 179
All learning is to be referred to use and action.
93
Learning exercises its power even in warfare.
69
Learning always breathes progress. 84
Division of learning is threefold. 104
The seat of learning is the faculty of the rational soul. ibid.
Division of speculative learning. 190
Three intemperances of learning. 34
Various effects of learning. 28
Home-

--- Page 650 ---
**INDEX OF SUBJECTS**

Domitian's prophecy. 67
The greatest use of dramas. 145
How doubts are to be removed. 582
Doubts to be resolved and definitively concluded.
                                                                        211, 212
A calendar of doubts is needed. 212

**E**

**E**cho, what it is. 163
The Church as an ark in the flood, in the wilderness, in the tem-
ple. 138, 139
The Church preserved gentile learning. 62
Advantages of collegiate education. 470
How far elections are to be retained. 205
Refutations of sophisms. 326
treated by Aristotle. ibid.
by Plato. ibid.
Refutations of interpretation. 327
of images. 328
The doctrine of refutations. 326
Elizabeth, Queen of England. 89
Elixir. 227
The eloquence of Augustus. 2
Eloquence and wisdom differ. 365
Eloquence is inferior to wisdom. ibid.
Emanations of writings are needed. 606
Emblem, a part of artificial memory. 337
The rashness of empirics. 14, 460
Endymion sleeping. 163
Epaminondas the Theban. 13
The philosophy of Epictetus. 438
Epictetus's precept concerning the philosopher. 521
                                                                    Epictetus's

--- Page 651 ---
**AND OF WORDS.**
Epictetus' wise saying.                                      81
Epictetus establishes degrees of tranquility.               380
Epicurus' death.                                            248
Epicurus' opinion concerning fate is condemned.             154
  other opinions of the same [person] are praised.         161
Epicurus attributes a human form to the gods.               331
Letter.                                                     141
Cicero's letter to Atticus.                                 510
Spartan letter.                                             351
Epitomes of histories are rejected like bookworms.          125
Erasmus' echo.                                               35
Error in the first digestion.                               297
Various errors by which letters are hindered, are recounted,
  from page 45 to 54
The learned prefer to be hidden.                             24
Learning softens manners.                                    80
  what else it accomplishes. ibid.
  it removes the fear of death.                              81
Learning is not like a lark, but like a hawk.               513
Learning brings more remedy than harm.                       16
Learning is not an impediment to politicians.                14
What most brands the learned.                               479
The learned age from the death of Domitian up to
  Emperor Commodus.                                          67
Essay, Pythagoreans abstained from eating meat.             493
Being, separated from well-being, is a curse.               542
Ethics twofold.                                             431
Ethics to be learned before politics.                       466
Ethics, the handmaid of Theology.                           455
Ee Ethics

--- Page 652 ---
I N D E X O F T H I N G S

The end of Ethics. 367
The division of Ethics. 428
Original etymology of names to be rejected. 344
Euclid's geometry. 231
Euclid (Theon). 422
Euphony & cacophony. 346
External euthanasia is desired. 258
Self-examination to be undertaken. 522, 523
An excuse to be offered as occasion arises. 483
Examples, how they are to be treated in law. 566. &
	seq.
Recent examples do not conform to sound reason.
	568
	older ones to be accepted cautiously. ibid.
	are like water. 569
One should abstain from fragments of examples. 568
Scholastic exercises, what kind they ought to be. 99
It is safer to omit exercises than to repeat them fre-
	quently. 424
The Persian army in the plains of Arbela. 548
A veteran army, for what it is conducive. 557, 558
Where there is a good reputation, almost all things are fitting. 478
Learned experience. 299
To experience are owed the most useful discoveries. 162
Although experiments do not always succeed, nevertheless
	they inform. 312
Powerful experiments. 311
Variation of experiment. 300
	production. 303
	transfer. 304
	inversion. 307
	compulsion. 308
	applica-

--- Page 653 ---
**AND OF WORDS.**
application.                             310
copulation.                             ibid.
Ezekiel concerning Pharaoh.                   511
***
                    **F**
Fabius Maximus is criticized by Machia-
     velli.                             533
Aesop's fable about the woman.                 302
  about the frogs.                             377
  about the fox and the cat.                      390
A very ancient fable.                       94
A fable of a certain philosopher.             112
The fable that Menenius Agrippa quelled a sedition.
                                   146, 147
The fable of Pentheus and Orpheus.                173
These things ought to be done, and those not omitted. 539
Ease of manners in a judge is more pernicious than the corruption of gifts.
     500, 501
How much excessive credulity has harmed. 42
Faction is quelled by faction.                462
Not entirely to be trusted in deeds.             518
A calendar of falsehoods is desired.     212
Falinus, ambassador of King Artaxerxes.        78
The reputation of good and bad people, what it is after death.
     487.
Fame and reputation have cunning.        535
All fame emanates from those within the household.          488
Fame is necessary for war.                    172
Fame is the spittle of the common people.                      491
Truer fame emanates from those within the household.        520
In a discordant family, let a certain humble person be preeminent.
     483
               Ee 2               Famu-

--- Page 654 ---
**INDEX OF MATTERS**
*Retinue & attendants contribute to military power.* 552
*Lower household is compared to the vigils of festivals.* 374
*Fascination.* 279
*Fasti & chronology.* 124
*What are the fates of things.* 153
*One must submit to the fates.* 536
*Cats see at night.* 286
*Happiness is an inimitable thing.* 387
*Window open for flying out.* 539
*Iron is drawn to the magnet, unless it were heavier.* 434
*Christian Faith.* 598
*Faith will cease in the state of glory.* 596
*To whom faith must be given.* 452
*Unfortunate excess of confidence.* 512
*Thrifty son.* 486
    *worthless.* 487
*The end of Astrology, natural magic, & chemistry, what it is.* 44
*Sources of law.* 562
*Forms are the true object of knowledge.* 215
*Ant.* 294
*The ant protects itself, but harms gardens.* 510, 511
*Ant-hill of arts.* 340
*The emotions of fear & hope restrain all others.* 462
*A collection of minor formulas is desired.* 419
*Unequal encounters of strength & numbers.* 548
*Fortune imitates women.* 543
                                                               *Fortune*

--- Page 655 ---
**AND OF WORDS.**
Indulgent Fortune weakens spirits. 459
Fortune flows into the lap of its own accord. 540
Fortune, daughter of the common people. 154
Restless aspiration to Fortune's heights. 542
Fortune's doctrine and speculation. 514
Let Fortune's craftsman skillfully use his own rule. 534
Fortune's construction is desired. 513
Fortune's sinew, the strengths of the mind. 535
Moderation is more easily maintained in Fortune's state than in its increase. 459
Each one is the maker of his own fortune. 512
	how that happens. 513
Excellent men often renounce Fortune of their own accord. 514
For acquiring Fortune, what things are required are as weighty as those for virtue. 513
Francis Rabelais. 339
Is the cold carried downwards? 307, 308
No trust in the face. 516
How late fruits are to be acquired. 310, 311
The face is not to be painted. 269, 270
Tightrope walkers. 270
Sacred frenzy. 279

G

Aesopic Rooster. 88
Gem of March and May. 377
Prudence of jewelers. 446
Generalities do not inform too much. 363
Geometry. 231
Georgius Agricola. 224
Hieroglyphic gestures. 342
	Ee 3	Gilber-

--- Page 656 ---
INDEX OF SUBJECTS
*Gilbert wrote accurately about the magnet.* 156
*Gilbert restored the doctrines of Philolaus.* 214
*Ice and saltpeter are very cooling.* 311
*Leaden globe.* 302
*Gorgons.* 164
*Graeae.* 165
*Greeks more suited to the arts.* 345
*Greek license in the composition of words.*
ibid.
*Grammar is twofold.* 340
*Grammar's use is small in vernacular languages,*
*greater in foreign ones.* 343
*Philosophical grammar is desired.* 346
*Grammar is a path towards other sciences.*
343
*bipartite.* ibid.
*Heavy things seek the earth.* 434
*Inquiry concerning heavy and light.* 318
*The envy of Gregory I.* 62
*Guicciardini on Clement VII, Cicero to*
*Atticus, the fable of Ixion and Phocion,*
*and Cato the Younger are commended.* 17

H
*For acquiring a habit, two times/periods should be observed.* 464
*Habit embraces virtues and vices.* 463
*How heresiarchs delight in power.* 84
*Harmony of divine wisdom and human reason.* 162
*Hebrew language.* 345
*Hebrews, a Nazarene people.* ibid.
*Ivy*

--- Page 657 ---
AND OF WORDS.
Ivy, why sacred to Dionysius. 173
Hemicrania. 308
Enoch, prince of the contemplative life. 436
Prudent edict of Henry VII, King of England.
551
Henry, Duke of Guise. 74
Parable of Heraclitus. 332
Words of the same. 50
Hermes, why thrice-greatest. 4
Herodicus's care of health. 439
Heroes, who. 64
Ancient and sacred use of hieroglyphs among
the Egyptians. 341
Fable of the leech. 501
Spaniards sparingly grant the right of citizenship, but now feel the scarcity of
natives. 553
warlike. 555
they maintain a veteran army. 558
Spanish adage. 518
Empire of the Spaniards. 553
History pertains to memory. 104
of how many kinds. 106
History concerning prophecies. 138
is desired. 139
Cosmographical history, manifold. 136
History of England and Scotland, what kind. 128
Appendices of History. 141
their division. ibid.
Civil History, first division. 117, 121, 123
second. 136
dignity and difficulty. 121
faults. ibid.
Ee 4 Histo-

--- Page 658 ---
I N D E X O F T H I N G S
Ecclesiastical history, division. 138
History of generations, parts. 116
Natural history, first division. 107
     second. 115
History, matters of lesser importance greatly detract.
     135
Inductive history. 114
     is desired. 117
Just history. 123
     its division. 125
     very strict laws. 133
     political matters not to be introduced into it. 136
Legitimate & absolute history is very rarely found.
     122
Literary history is desired. 118
     precepts for compiling it. ibid.
     its use. 120
Pure, mixed, & ruminated history. 136
Natural history, for what purpose made. 110
Natural history, threefold in subject. 107
     twofold in use. 115
History of Nemesis or providence. 140
History of time, which. 127
     universal & particular. 133
     its division into annals & daily acts. 134
Truth becomes the historian. 127
Homer nourished more than Sulla or Augustus.
     84
Men famous at home are common in the metropolis. 354
Men change with their actions. 515
     knowledge of them does not fall under precept. 516
     it can be elicited in six ways. ibid.
                                                                    Home

--- Page 659 ---
AND OF WORDS.
Man ought to aspire to God's love. 470
Man fell. ibid.
Man is placed in Paradise. 56
Man is a wolf to man. 502
Homoionomy. 578
Man should deny himself and approach God. 595
Honor in free monarchies is more agreeable than under tyrants. 83
Hours seem longer to the sick without a clock than if they are measured by the clock itself. 389
How leisure hours are to be employed. 19
An enemy ought to be attacked when he is secure. 171
The human body is composed in many ways. 246
Hydraulics. 271
Hypochondriacs. 241

I

Saying of James VI, King of England. 449
His monarchical rights. 450
Janus two-faced. 288
Jason the Thessalian. 454
Idols of the human mind, fallacies. 32
Idols of the tribe, of the cave, of the market-place, of the theatre. 329
Jehu's response to the messenger. 602
The diligence of the Jesuits in educating youth. 25
The Jesuits establish the Roman See. 62
The schools of the Jesuits are commended. 422
Jezebel painted her face with pigments. 270
Those punished by ignominy sometimes turn out fortunate. 530
What are inferences in the Christian faith. 599
Ee 5 Illite-

--- Page 660 ---
**INDEX OF SUBJECTS**

*   The illiterate's blindness and misery. 82
*   Vain imaginations. 34
*   What the use of images accomplishes. 280
*   Imitation of others not to be foolishly undertaken. 525
*   Inequality in encounter to be avoided. 483
*   Obstacles to learning. 7
*   The art of commanding comprises three duties. 545
*   Emperors remarkably learned and warlike. 13
*   How the boundaries of empire are to be extended. 545
*   How the greatness of empires is to be obtained. 547
*   is subjected to measure and calculations. ibid.
*   Variety of empires. 83
*   Rule by knowledge far superior to others. 84
*   Impulse of the mind to be restrained. 522
*   The cruel mercies of the impious. 492
*   How much imposture and credulity harm learning.
    42
*   Impressions. 242
*   The mind of the imprudent similar to an unpolished stone. 508
*   Those suffering from nightmare. 241
*   Pauline rebuke. 38
*   Cause of the discovery of the West Indies. 291
*   Treasures of the Indies. 559
*   The art of indication and direction is needed. 299
*   Individual things affect the senses. 105
*   Induction. 323
*   Form of induction. 294
*   The word "inept" is not used in Greek. 345
*   Infants call any women mothers. 213
*   First information in any case greatly occupies the judge.
    496
*   Bold talents intrude themselves without judgment. 528
ad

--- Page 661 ---
**AND OF WORDS.**
Two ways for exercising talents. 423
Profound intellects have more dignity than happiness. 533
Description of a wicked and malevolent disposition. 499
Not all are to be judged by intellect. 519
Characteristics of intellects. 457
how to be selected. 457 & seq.
The liberty of intellects must be favored. 423
A provoked intellect is finally recognized. 114
Ingratitude towards the well-deserving. 500
Wrongs pollute justice. 502
Repetition of wrongs. 503
Injustice: a three-fold source. 562
The true standard of legitimate inquiry. 514
Graftings and a shoot grafted onto a trunk. 300, 301
Young people to be more diligently prepared for the difficult matters of law through institutions. 585
Not the largest, but the most suitable instruments accomplish the work. 535
The human intellect is more affected by affirmatives than by negatives. 329
A prudent question is half of knowledge. 316
To find what it is. 313
Inventory of human resources. 228
The invention of arts is desired. 291
Invention. 313
is not. ibid.
topical. 314
ready-made. ibid.
Kinds of logical invention. 291
Inventors of things and arts. 58
No way is impassable for virtue. 512
                                     Ee 6                                  Invi-

--- Page 662 ---
**INDEX OF SUBJECTS**
*Envy of men.* 376
*John, Duke of Saxony.* 238
*The Book of Job, full of the mysteries of natural philosophy.* 59
*Job's question.* 10
*The art of jesting.* 272
*Anger is broken by a soft answer.* 482
*Let us not mix our affairs with angry men.* 502
*Imitation of artificial rainbows.* 305
*The path of the lazy is like a hedge of thorns.* 500
*The blessings of Judah and Issachar do not agree.* 550
*Who is the best judge.* 573
*Let the judge not show partiality to persons.* 500
*An appendix to the art of judging is desired.* 333
*In a judge, leniency of character is more pernicious than corruption by bribes.* 500, 501
*Judgments are the anchor of laws.* 583
*The judgments of God are inscrutable to man.* 140
*The judgments of God overthrow the schemes of the wicked.* 542
*Judgments are not easily to be rescinded.* 589
*Judgments ought not to be attempted through fictitious persons and causes.* 588
*Lack of judgment.* 533
*Instability of judgments.* 589
*Concerning judgment or the art of judging.* 323
*Concerning judgment by induction.* ibid.
*by syllogism.* 324
*An unjust and infamous judgment is to be avoided in a serious case.* 502
*Julian's edict against Christians.* 62
Julius

--- Page 663 ---
**AND OF WORDS.**
Friends of Julius Caesar.               524
    his education and learning.            74
    his analogy.                       75
    Anti-Cato.                    ibid.
    his apophthegms.                ibid.
Julius Caesar.                       13
Julius Caesar an orator from the beginning.     524
Julius Caesar never revealed secrets except by a simi-
    lar saying.                 511, 512
Julius Caesar quells rebels.      76
    he aspires to the name of king.         ibid.
    he responds to Metellus.              77
    he judges concerning Sulla's dictatorship.     78
The instruction of the young is entrusted to scholars. 24, 25
Legal pronouncements.                   570
Method of elucidating law.            582
Foundation of private law.         562
    it lies hidden under the protection of public law. ibid.
Law, from what examples it is to be drawn. 567
Public law, guardian of private [matters].       563
The memory of the just man endures.               487
Justinian's work not restored by a learned age.
                                   580.
Universal justice.              562
A just man pities even an animal.    492
Young men not suitable students of Ethics. 465
    much less of Politics.          466
Restoration of youth.            227
The fable of Ixion.                    226

                                 Kalon-

--- Page 664 ---
INDEX OF THINGS

K

K Calendar of doubts and falsehoods is desired. 212

L

L Labors of hands and tongue separated. 503
Labor conquers all things. 294
One must rely on the cornerstone. 543
what is the cornerstone of Theology and Philosophy. 543, 544
No one should be praised in person. 450
Praises of various people are various. 372
Moderate praises are beneficial: importunate ones are harmful. 507
What is desired in public readings. 95
Laws differ greatly. 563
Penal laws, much less capital ones, are to be extended. 565
Laws are the anchors of the republic. 583
Let laws be certain. 564
In laws, one must beware of gangrene. 577
An ancient fable should not be mixed with laws. 587
In laws, many cases are omitted. 565
No one is wiser than laws, to what extent this should be accepted. 577
Concerning obsolete laws. ibid.
Philosophers and Jurists wrote concerning laws. 561
but citizens write better. ibid.
A great part of moral law is more sublime than where the light of nature can ascend. 597
Legu-

--- Page 665 ---
AND OF WORDS.
Lawyers more versed in practice than in the rules of law. 14
Dignity of laws. 564
Extension [of laws]. 565
Expurgation of laws or a new digest. 578
End and scope of laws. 563
Twofold uncertainty of laws. 564
Obscurity of laws. 580
Prologues to be avoided [in laws]. 581
How the regeneration and restoration of laws should be instituted. 579
Concerning the retrospection of laws. 573
[Concerning their] obscurity. 575
[Concerning their] excessive accumulation. ibid.
[Concerning] new digests [of laws]. 578
[Concerning their] obscure description. 580
Lepidus, never the author of a servile opinion. 506
What superficial tastes in philosophy cause. 10
Perplexing law. 580
The Lesbian rule of law. 581
Book on the Duty of a King, by James, King of England. 448
Those blessed with children are especially anxious about future times. 89
Freedom of speech. 521
Books offer little help for natural philosophy and medicine. 96
Auxiliary books. 584
Two books: scripture and creation. 63
Too many fabulous books. 109
Books, by what and how they are to be named. 32
Books

--- Page 666 ---
**INDEX OF SUBJECTS**

*Books of ancient writers, why they are of little use.* 465
*Books pertaining to the office or art of authors, one fault alone affects them.* 448
*Ancient and modern languages differ.* 345, 346
*Languages are vehicles of knowledge.* 61
*Confusion of languages after the flood.* 58
*Characteristics of various languages.* 346
*A treatise concerning languages, which should be written.* 344
*The humanities perform two duties for religion.* 62
*Learning enriches more than kingdoms.* 84
*Learning is not a friend of idleness.* 17, 18
*nor does it destroy reverence for laws.* 20
*but it softens minds and makes them compliant.* ibid.
*By what works learning may be amplified.* 91
*What learning accomplishes.* 16, 17
*Learning now seems to have returned to mortals for the third time.* 591
*Diminution of the dignity of learning, whence it comes.* 22
*Monuments of learning last longer than those made by hand.* 86
*The third period of learning (which is in this our century) surpasses the Greeks and Romans by a long interval.* 592
*The greatest pleasure of learning.* 85
*Learned experience.* 300
*Learned men ought to apply themselves to the powerful.* 30
*and to serve the times.* 33
Litera-

--- Page 667 ---
**ET VERBORUM.**
Learned men frequently poor. 22
Learned men do not observe decorum. 30
Learned men delight in occupations. 18
Why learned men do not easily adapt themselves. 29
The fortune of learned men. 22
The manners of learned men. 24
Peoples renowned in letters and war. 13
Livia, her character. 532
Livy on the city of Rome. 23
Commonplaces are lacking. 391
The use of commonplaces. 335
Four arts of logic. 290
Trifles of logic. 276
Logic and ethics. 288
Logic and rhetoric to be studied not by boys, but by more advanced persons. 98
Why logic is less pleasing. 289, 290
One must speak with the common people, etc. 332
Lucian describes a parasitic philosopher.
31
He attacks Jupiter. 47
Examples of certain luminous or shining things (without fire). 285, 286
The nature of light not investigated. 284
The origins of light to be investigated. 286
Lucius Commodus, learned. 68
Lucretius' saying in which he depicts the pleasure of learning. 85, 86
Most people seek knowledge for the sake of gain and sustenance. 52
Lull's art, an imposture. 364
A wolf does not heed a multitude of sheep. 548
Luther's

--- Page 668 ---
I N D E X R E R U M
*In Luther's times, the extravagance of prayer became prevalent.*
                                              34
*Likewise, hatred and contempt for scholastics.*
                                              35
*First light of created forms.*                56
*Lysander's pernicious saying.*                  541

              M

**M** *achiavelli's words.*                 22 & 23
*Machiavelli is praised.*                      451
*Machiavelli is rejected.*                     540
*To make a machine or a structure is one thing, another*
    *to erect the one that has been built.*                     447
*Ceremonial magic.*                         280
*Celestial magic.*                             207
*Natural magic is desired.*                225
*Natural magic has much fantasy.*      44
*Magic of the Persians.*                             183
*What is magic?*                                 225
*Three Magi, kings.*                          ibid.
*Magnanimity in character is not to be destroyed.*     446
*Magnet attracts iron.*                     304
    *More about it.*                       308, 309
*Gilbert accurately described the magnet.*       156
*Softening/Enervation.*                               268
*Compensation for evils by good things.*               543
*Maniacs.*                                    270
*Marcus the philosopher.*                          68
    *Patient towards his wife's character.*               69
*Pearls not to be thrown to pigs.*           486
*Dominion of the sea, an epitome of monarchy.*            558
                                               *About*

--- Page 669 ---
AND OF WORDS.
on what Pompey & Themistocles thought. ibid.
Miracles of martyrs teem with many fables. 42, 43
Formless matter. 152
Mathematics either pure or mixed. 231
   its greatest utility. 231, 232
Mathematics & logic, handmaids to physics. 231
Mechanics. 111
The progress of time advanced the mechanical arts.
                                                                              45
Use of mechanical history. 113
   what kind is desired. 114
Method of healing too concise. 262
Soporific medicines. 226
Physicians attend the sick more than the healthy. 375
Physician's authority. 456
Physicians more intent on another's study than their own art.
   249
Physicians wrongly declare several diseases incurable.
   257
Physicians go against nature. 251
Physician's duty. 258
Physicians similar to bishops. 260
Authentic & positive medicine is desired.
                                                                             261
Why Aesculapius is the god of medicine. 245
Three parts of medicine. 251
Why medicine & music are joined by poets.
   247
Medicine has many impostors. 248
A medicinal thread is desired. 263
Medical narratives are desired. 254
                                                                      Medico-

--- Page 670 ---
**INDEX OF SUBJECTS**

*Negligence of physicians is censured. 254. & seq.*
*A physician gains honor from the outcome. 248*
*Medusa. 164*
*is beheaded by Perseus. 165*
*Honey and balsam preserve corpses. 306*
*Dispute of the body's members with the stomach. 94*
*Artificial memory. 336*
*Aid to memory. 334*
*Local memory. 304*
*Negligently inquired into in strengthening memory. 335*
*A lie uncovers the truth. 518*
*Menenius Agrippa appeased sedition by a fable.*
*146, 147*
*The human mind like an enchanted mirror. 328*
*Mercury at the crossroads. 102*
*Purifications of metals contain errors. 302*
*Metaphysics is described. 192*
*is distinguished from physics. 193*
*Metaphysics is an inquiry into formal causes*
*and final causes. 245*
*Metaphysics, a part which is lacking. 217*
*Metaphysics produces magic. 224*
*Various kinds of method. From page 357. up to*
*to 362*
*two parts. 362*
*Various methods. ibid.*
*Transmission by method. 357*
*Method of imposture. 364*
*Method, the architecture of sciences. 362*
*Method of discourse. 355*
*Torment of Mezentius. 577*
*Mezentius, despiser of the Gods. 511*
*Mili-*

--- Page 671 ---
**AND OF WORDS,**
\*Military art flourishes in a nascent republic.\* 272
\*Military art and learning follow each other very closely.\*
\*14\*
\*Wonder-workers and petty marvels.\* 110
\*Miracles were performed not for converting atheists,\*
\*but superstitious idolaters.\* 185, 186
\*We wonder at either new things or great things.\* 80
\*Mercy commanded under the old law.\* 493
\*Mercy towards the wicked is cruel.\* ibid.
\*Nature implanted mercy in man.\* 492
\*Misitheus, tutor of Gordian the Younger.\* 15
\*Some pay the penalty for moderation.\* 527
\*Method of training talents.\* 423
\*Harsh critics (like) Momus.\* 372
\*Momus.\* 514
\*A monk's lid thrown aloft.\* 305
\*Monastic life is not truly contemplative.\* 436
\*It is harder for a one-eyed person to lose one eye than\*
\*for him who has both.\* 381
\*Many monadic things in nature.\* 330
\*What should rule in moral matters.\* 462
\*Those afflicted by disease who do not feel pain are sick in\*
\*mind.\* 455
\*Three things to be

--- Page 672 ---
INDEX OF THINGS
Examples of gentle death. 258
How to provide for the serenity of morals. 446.
More, Chancellor of England. 239
Moses, the first lawgiver. 58
The Roman custom of addressing the army. 76
Simple and compound motion. 208
The false daily motion of the earth. 196
Various motions. 208 & following.
Voluntary motion. 281
An unequal encounter of a multitude with strength.
548
All things of the world are vanity. 542
Cleanliness of the body. 269
The world as a desert. 264
The world, an image of God; man, the world's condition to the he-athens. 186
The Muses, companions and handmaidens of desires. 176
The seat of the Muses. 92
Indian fly. 285
Dead fly. 489
Music. 271
Twofold music. 162
Inventors of music. 58
The musician adapts himself to different ears. 369
Mucianus deceived Antonius Primus. 518
Mucianus, the wisest man of his time.
526
Explanation of mysteries. 599

Nation-

--- Page 673 ---
**AND WORDS.**

N

Nations differing in languages, conduct commerce through gestures. 341
Nature is disturbed by emotions just as the sea by winds. 460
Nature is the mirror of art. 305
The nature of each thing is most clearly perceived in its smallest parts. 113
Nature is another proclamation of divine power and wisdom. 159
From the light of nature we have certain nations. 597
The great works of nature lie outside the beaten paths. 311
Nature hates compulsion, it admits persuasion. 464, 465
Natural action, motion, and progression is a hunt. 158
Faith and its mysteries are not to be sought from the observation of natural things. 186
You would sooner deceive nature than suppress it. 158
Let us imitate nature, which does nothing in vain. 538
Inferior natures aspire to nobler ones. 443
Naval victories bring an end to war. 558
Those escaping shipwrecks pay their vows. 329, 330
Navigations at this time throughout the whole world. 137
The invention of the ship. 87
The nautical needle. 304
The Neapolitan expedition. 166, 167
The monarchy of Nebuchadnezzar. 552
Prudence in negotiating. 479
desire-

--- Page 674 ---
I N D E X R E R U M
Is lacking.                                                                480
Prudence in negotiating exercised by the Romans. ibid.
Doctrine concerning business.                                                 479
   Its division.                                                            ibid.
   Never discussed by anyone.                                ibid.
Diverse purpose of affairs.                                          18
Nerva, a learned man.                                                         67
Saltpeter and ice cool most greatly.                     311
That nobles should not be multiplied.                                         550
Servants of nobles.                                                         551
Slaves and laborers of nobles are the common people.               550
A multitude of nobles in a kingdom is compared to a forest.
                                                                                    ibid.
The owl and the cat see by night.                                  286
Know yourself.                                               522 & 525
Twofold marks of things.                                                 341
What harm general notions bring.             327
Notions of words of the soul.                                        297
Knowledge of others.                                                          522
Knowledge of oneself.                                                                 ibid.
Knowledge of religion restrains kings from error.               66
Novelty pleasing to human nature.                                 499
Love of novelty.                                                           441

                                        O

[Large initial O] Degrees of indebtedness.                               381
The prefecture is not to be entrusted to the indebted and needy.
   501
Voluntary offerings are daily sacrifices.               1
Opportunities sometimes to be provoked rather than awaited.
   537
   Which Demosthenes likewise admits.                        ibid.
                                                                           Occasion-

--- Page 675 ---
AND OF WORDS.
Occasions and stratagems to be combined. 537
Occasions return in a cycle. 142
Concealment of defects is necessary. 528
The eyes of certain animals glow in the dark.
285
The eye is not satisfied by seeing. 6
Mutual duties. 452
Concerning special and respective duties. 447
Book concerning the duty of a king, authored by James, King of England.
450
The duty of man in general. 447
How even the greatest works may be overcome. 90
How inventions of works may have come into human knowledge. 224
What a certain remarkable opiate may accomplish. 307
Opportunity to be created. 478
Lost opportunity. 533
Speeches. 141
An interrupted speech is better than a continuous one. 494
Speech is occupied with adorning honorable matters. 367
The end of a speech is better than the beginning. 488
Aaron the Orator. 365
A diligent orator has premeditated whatever comes into discussion. 315
Orator and sophist differ. 327
The world in our age remarkably opened up. 137
Orders of Angels. 56
Confusion of orders and ranks is detrimental to civil affairs. 135
What the order of things and time may accomplish. 536
An instrument of speech is needed. 342
                                 F f                                Of Orpheus

--- Page 676 ---
I N D E X O F S U B J E C T S
Orpheus's theater.                                     65
Ortelius's chorography.                               364
Osorius the Lusitanian.                                   35
Decent ostentation greatly
    increases a man's reputation.                      526, 527
Need for ostentation.                                  525

P

**P**eace softens minds.                             557
How pedagogical matters are to be instituted.                422, 423
Jests of a pedagogue.                                   25
Panic terror.                                     160
The fable of Pan.                                       149
  generation.                                      ibid.
  likeness.                                       ibid.
  powers & functions.                            ibid.
  deeds.                                        150
  loves.                                         ibid.
  daughter.                                            151
Pan's hunt.                                      299
Making of papyrus,                                   300
Parables frequent among the Hebrews.                   508, 509
Utility of parables.                               146
Method of writing parables.                          509
Paracelsus is criticized.                           279
Paracelsus is refuted.                               603
Bearded parasites.                                    31
The judgment of Paris.                                    88
Division of human doctrine.                           104
Examples of patience.                                  238
Venetian Patrician.                                  214
Paul alone among the Apostles was learned.           61, 62
                                                 Poor-

--- Page 677 ---
          AND OF WORDS.
Poverty and destitution are like an armed traveler. 485
Poverty is to be revered.                   22, 23
Poverty is the fortune of virtue.                24
Money is the sinew of war when the sinew of muscles
    is lacking in an effeminate people.          549
Infantry is the chief strength of the army.      551
Pegasus from the blood of Medusa.               165
How great tasks are to be imposed on any talents.
                                     463, 464
Perception and sense differ.             282
What perception is.                           283
  Its doctrine is desired.              284
Periander consulted concerning preserving tyranny.
                                          342
The trifling skill of certain counselors.
                                          546
The story of Perseus.                      164 & seq.
Bad respect of persons.          500, 501
Perspective not discussed.                 284
Spectacles magnify small things.          309
Whence disturbance of the mind originates.            9
The disturber of the family will possess winds.    487
Disturbances are tortures.                   517
The perverse judgment of some concerning art.     107
Phantasy and reason differ.              288
  More concerning it.                            289
The different methods of waging war of Philip
    and Alexander.                                  166
The abuse of philosophy.                       438
The division of philosophy concerning the soul.        273
The division of natural philosophy into mine and furnace.
                                          189
                   Ff 2            specula-

--- Page 678 ---
I N D E X O F T H I N G S
*speculative and operative.*                                     ibid.
*Philosophy's threefold object and threefold ray.*
                                                                                    179
*Empty philosophy deceives.*                                             6
    *how this saying is to be understood.*                     10
*Moral philosophy, handmaid of Theology.*               455
*Natural philosophy, what it is.*                                         113
*Why philosophy flourished among the first authors.*
                                                                                  45, 46
*Philosophy, the work of reason.*                                   104
*Philosophers' tenets.*                                               212
*The tenderness of certain ancient philosophers*
    *in being compliant.*                                                   439
*A work on ancient philosophers is desired.*                   213
*A philosopher falling into water while gazing at*
    *the stars.*                                                                  112, 113
*Phocion to the people; have I perhaps erred?*                    372
*Phormio's disputations on wars rejected by Hannibal.*
                                                                    448
*Physics is distinguished from metaphysics.*                             193
*Division of physics into three doctrines.*                               ibid.
*Division of scattered physics into concrete and abstract.*
                                                                        194
    *of the concrete.*                                                                ibid.
    *of the abstract.*                                                                208
*Physics produces mechanics.*                                   224
*Physiognomy.*                                                            240
*The art of painting.*                                                                 271
*Painting is compared to poetry.*                                         105
*Painting renews the memory of a thing.*                                 306
*Pygmalion's madness.*                                                   36
*Laziness, laborious in the end.*                                           500
                                                                                Pinda-

--- Page 679 ---
ET VERBORUM.
Pindar praises Hiero. 237
Pindar, sententious. 474
How beautifully Plato introduces Hippias the sophist
disputing with Socrates. 112
Plato's saying about virtue. 368
Plato's dogma. 2
Plato's eulogy for his teacher Socrates. 31
Plato makes rhetoric similar to cookery, but
wrongly. 368
Plato's opinion, neither to be entirely scorned
nor eagerly accepted. 244
The common people of natives consist of three types. 554
Pliny, Cardan, Albertus wrote many fabulous things. 43
Pliny, the best author of natural history. 109
Plutarch on Timoleon. 387
Pliny the Younger praised Trajan in person. 450
Division of poetry. 143
Poetry bestows upon human nature what history denies.
144
is a partaker of divinity. 145
was held in honor even in rude ages and among barbarian
nations. ibid.
is a sport of genius. 289
What is poetry. 142, 347
is taken in a double sense. 143
narrative or heroic. 144
dramatic. 145
parabolic. 146
Poetry, wine of demons. 465
Poet of swans. 130, 131
Ff 5 Poeta-

--- Page 680 ---
I N D E X R E R U M
*Customs of poets.* 529
*Politicians disparage learned men by the name of commoners.*
15
*Arrogance and self-love of politicians.* 28
*To become a true politician is a difficult thing.* 513
*A politician should not be solely intent on one thing.* 539
*Catalog of versatile things.* 229
*Statue of Polyphemus.* 118
*Busybodiness, a rash thing.* 522
*Memorable saying of Pompey the Great.* 434
*Pompey more secretive than Caesar, not better.* 531
*He concealed his ambition.* ibid.
*Made sole consul.* 532
*Pompey, because of the dissimilarity of his character, could not*
*achieve what Sulla did.* 525
*Pompey did not read Sertorius's papers.* 485
*Catalog of warlike peoples.* 555
*A warlike people strengthens a kingdom.* 549
*The people is compared to the sea.* 460
*A people oppressed by tribute is never warlike.*
550
*What things are called possible.* 103
*One must not contend with the powerful.* 483
*Practice omitted by ethics.* 430
*Neighboring and joined estates make greater revenues ap-*
*pear than separated ones.* 390
*Use of categories.* 328
*Predictions and elections, to what extent they are to be retained.*
205
*A prefecture is not to be entrusted to debtors.* 501
*The prejudice of first information can hardly be re-*
*moved.* 496, 497
*Preference-*

--- Page 681 ---
ET VERBORUM.
AND OF WORDS.

Prælationum quorundum ſtultiſſimarum exem-
      pla.                                88
Examples of certain most foolish preferences.

Prælectiones.                            589
Lectures.

Prælia navalia quantum momenti habeant.
                                         558
How much importance naval battles have.

Præludia muſicorum.                      591
Musical preludes.

Præmiorum & pœnarum uſus in civilibus.   462
The use of rewards and punishments in civil matters.

Prænotio memoriæ artificialis pars prima. 337
Preliminary notion of artificial memory, first part.

Prætoris album.                          573
The Praetor's register.

Pragmatica ſanctio.                 553, 554
Pragmatic Sanction.

Princeps mendaciis credens.              491
A prince believing lies.

Princeps ſuſurronibus & ſycophantis ne credat.
      ibid.
A prince should not believe whisperers and sycophants.

Principes creduli peſſimi.               492
Credulous princes are the worst.

Principes viris obæratis præfecturam ne commit-
      tant.                              501
Princes should not entrust a prefecture to indebted men.

Principibus ſub eruditis ſæcula maxime fuerunt
      felicia.                            66
Ages were most fortunate for princes under learned men.

Principis iram incurrens quomodo ſe geret. 495
How one who incurs a prince's wrath should conduct himself.

Principium rerum unum.                   151
The one origin of things.

Privati non ingenio ſed ſine judicandi.  519
Private individuals judge, not by genius, but without judgment.

Probatio per incommodum.                 325
Proof by inconvenience.

Problemata Ariſtotelis commendantur.     211
Aristotle's Problems are commended.

Problemata & placita.                  ibid.
Problems and opinions.

Prodigos naufragia fortunarum perdunt.   48
The ruin of their fortunes destroys prodigals.

--- Page 682 ---
```
INDEX OF SUBJECTS
Prosody.                                     347
Proteus.                                      114
Eternal Providence and divine judgments to be
    considered.                               542
Providence at work in war.                    170
The prudent foresee the ruin which threatens
    virtues.                                  505
The prudent pay attention to their steps, fools
    turn aside to deceits.                    ibid.
Two kinds of prudence, true and false.        ibid.
Prudence in imparting, likewise in providing for
    one's own affairs.                        510
Corrupted prudence.                           541
Prudence in private speech is lacking.        370
The mind of the prudent similar to mirrors and
    waters.                                   508
Psalms invite to the contemplation of the works
    of God.                                    63
Parrot's "hail!"                              294
Boys to be enticed by pleasing things, men by
    perjuries.                                541
Battle at Actium, likewise at the Curzola
    Islands.                                  558
Sea lung.                                     285
Jacob's wells.                                603
Pythagoras's reply to Hiero.                  435

                      Q
Quantity of essential form.                   230
  What ought to be the end of Philosophy.      54

                      R
Rabbis extracted the natural and moral sense from
      Mosaic ceremonies.                       58
```

--- Page 683 ---
AND WORDS.
Rabbis' prediction. 25
Sun's rays burn through mirrors. 301
Sun's rays scatter on white. 308
Branches of method which are to be proven. 362
Aesop's fable about frogs. 377
Reason not to be heard according to the word of God. 595
The use of reason and disputation. 598
The rule of reason is disturbed in three ways. 366
The use of human reason in divine matters, likewise its excess
twofold. 600, 601
How reason differs from affections. 368
Reason, the soul of speech. 340
A twofold way of reconciling friends. 503
Consultation and visitation of rulers is required for
the growth of learning. 97
The straight is the judge both of itself and of the crooked. 325
Twofold reduction through middle terms. ibid.
Kings have their own errors. 66
Royal wills are changeable. 459
What registers are. 124
The greatness of kingdoms, by what arts to be obtained. 547
namely, by a warlike people. 548
which is not burdened by tributes. 549, 550
in which nobles and high-born are not excessively multiplied. 550
by the number of natives. 552
by farmers, servants, freeborn, and artisans,
not sedentary mechanical ones. 554
by the pursuit of arms. ibid.
by just causes for taking up arms. 556
by a veteran army or a standing army. 557
Ff 5 of the sea

--- Page 684 ---
**INDEX OF SUBJECTS**

*   Dominion of the sea. 558
*   On rewards. 559
*   Why the Kingdom of heaven is compared to a grain of mustard seed. 547
*   The Kingdom of God to be sought first. 543
*   What strengthens a kingdom. 549 &c.
*   It is wrong to scrutinize the hearts of kings. 30
*   Relations. 127
*   Remuneration fosters learned men. 93
*   What is suitable for diseases of the kidneys. 253
*   Examples of late repentance. 533
*   Partiality is condemned in a judge. 501
*   A soft answer breaks anger. 482
*   Concerning answers and consultations. 588
*   Republics are moved more slowly. 475
*   A Republic is successfully administered by learned men. 14, 15
*   The art of retaining or guarding. 334
*   A learned king is a miracle. 4
*   Rhetoric. (see also, Oratorical eloquence.) 365
*   Appendices of Rhetoric. 420
*   The end of Rhetoric. 367
*   The function of Rhetoric. 366
*   Rhetoric prudently placed by Aristotle between dialectic and politics. 369
*   Plato wrongly placed Rhetoric among pleasurable things. 367
*   Rhetorical sophisms collected by Aristotle. 370
    *   are deficient in three ways. 370, 371
*   Rhetoric subverts imagination. 397
*   [Rhetoric] depicts virtue and the good. 368
Strength

--- Page 685 ---
**AND OF WORDS.**
The strength of sciences, how it consists. 39, 40
The Roman republic profusely admits citizens. 552, 553
Romans, vigorous and prompt in defending allies.
556, 557
The growth of the Roman Empire is attributed to the pru-
dence of six kings. 424
Romans similar to sheep. 474
Romans more suitable for managing affairs. 345
The celebrated triumphs of the Romans and immense
largesses to soldiers after a war successfully waged. 559
Romulus bequeathed military affairs to his citizens.
555
How a late-blooming rose is to be prepared. 310, 311
Rumor is compared to winds. 488
Country dwellers live more according to nature
than city dwellers. 159

S

Sugar shines while being broken. 285
Salt seasons meats in cooking. 306
   what it effects in artificial congelations. ibid.
   in the condensation of metals. ibid.
Solomon's aphorisms or proverbs. 482
Solomon's wisdom. 60
Certain maxims of Solomon concerning knowledge. 5. 6. 7.
9. 91. 219.
The advent of our Savior to earth. 61
   his words. 63
Our Savior's responses. 604
Samuel seeing the sons of Jesse. 295
                                 Ff 6                               Health

--- Page 686 ---
INDEX OF THINGS
*How health is to be preserved. 252
*The wise man will rule the stars. 512
*The wise man shapes his own fortune. 511
*If a wise man contends with a fool, he will not find re-
*st. 483, 484
*Wise men avert calamity. 490
*Habitual wisdom distinct from the floating/transient. 507
*Wiser than is proper. 506
*The errors of the wise or excellent, however slight, are not
*easily forgiven. 489
*Sarah, image of reason. 595, 596
*To transfer the scene into life. 477
*Skeptic philosophers. 297
*Games of chess. 600
*Schools of Zeno, Socrates, Epicurus, Pyrrho,
*and Herillus. 437
*Advantages of public schools. 422, 423
*The style of the Scholastics in the time of Luther. 34, 35
*The subtleties and empty trifling questions of the Scholastics,
*and how much their altercations harm learning. 38, 39, 40, 41
*Knowledge similar to waters. 178
*Knowledge concerning conversation, best treated. 478
*Excessive desire for knowledge, the first sin. 5
*The dignity of knowledge is to be sought in the archetype. 55
*Knowledge has three limits. 8
*The division of knowledge into Theology and philosophy.
*179
*Knowledge is reminiscence. 2
*Sciences are drawn from learned languages. 343
*Knowledge puffs up. 5
*does not puff up. 6
Knowl-

--- Page 687 ---
            AND OF WORDS.
Knowledge is dry light.                      5
All knowledge is delightful.                  ibid.
Knowledge is food for the mind.                   290
The length and breadth of sciences.         363
The duty of sciences is to shorten long journeys.
                                     217, 218
The difference of sciences to be imparted through aphorisms or method.
                                         358
What knowledge without charity may accomplish.      8
Proud knowledge gave birth to the fall of good and evil.
                                         6, 57
What universal knowledge is.                 179
    is desired.                          180
Writing is an aid to memory.             334
Concerning authentic writers.              584
How the interpretation of scripture is to be undertaken.
                                     602, 603
Scylla, a monster.                           40
The inexperience of secretaries.                  353
To unlock the secrets of nature, expense is needed.
                                       96, 97
One may acquiesce even in second or third [best]. 538
Sedentary mechanical arts in a kingdom are to be entrusted to foreigners
    or slaves.               554
Semele, Jupiter's mistress.                      172
Demigods.                                   64
Learned senators are better than others.          66
Senators who are mockers by nature.              490
Seneca, Nero's tutor, administered the empire for five years.
                                          15
How Seneca instructed Nero.        28
Old age can be slowed down.                227
                                        Old man

--- Page 688 ---
**INDEX OF SUBJECTS**

A benevolent old man, a miracle. 459
A sensible thing strikes the memory more strongly. 337
A more abundant inquiry into sense and the sensible. 281
What sense properly is. 6
The senses reflect the sun, reveal natural things, shut off divine things. 10
The seventh part of time. 542, 543
Septimius Severus ought either never to have been born or never to have died. 543
Late frugality is at the bottom. 381
Familiar discourse. 477
Not all speeches are to be heard. 484
To wash away marine discourse with river water. 489
Reason, the soul of speech. 340
The method of speech. 355
It is twofold. 356
Again twofold. ibid.
The organ of speech. 340
A management of speech by no means prudent and political. 494
Servants are not to be treated delicately. 497
To be promoted by degrees. ibid.
What is chiefly desired in servants. 498
A prudent servant will rule over a foolish son. 483
Severinus the Dane. 214
Severity is to be tempered with clemency. 572
The Sibyl burning two books. 381
The practice of seals in wax. 306
Typography shows the way. ibid.
Obstinate silence is to be avoided. 482
Sixtus

--- Page 689 ---
ET OF WORDS.
Sixtus the Fifth, pontiff. 15
Socrates' dispute with a sophist. 444
Socrates' eulogy by Plato. 112
The sun, good and bad in different respects. 375
More people worship the rising sun than the setting
sun. 499
Solemnities of words and deeds. 567
Solon's reply given to Croesus concerning gold. 549
Solon gave excellent laws. 26
The twin gates of sleep. 471
Interpretation of natural dreams. 240
Sophron is desired in Theology. 601
Those who do not adorn Sparta. 448
The Spartans had warlike citizens. 555
The Spartans were frugal in admitting new citizens. 552
Eyeglasses. 305
Mirrors made of metal, of what kind. 364
Divine and political mirror. 522
Plato's Cave. 331
We are delighted more by the hope of future things than by the enjoyment of present
things. 499
Hope, an antidote to evils. 379
Hope, the dream of one awake. 499
The doctrine of the spiracle. 273
Impression of spirit upon spirit. 279
Spontaneous offerings and daily sacrifices. 1
Sea foam shines. 285
Bastards turn out fortunate. 530
One standing in a valley best surveys the mountain. 448
The custom of the sculptor in carving a statue. 468
Statutes of time, laws. 566
Explanatory statute. ibid.
Stipen-

--- Page 690 ---
**INDEX OF SUBJECTS**

Costly stipends are required for the knowledge of literature and sciences. 96, 97
How much the meagerness of stipends harms learning. ibid.
The opinion of the Stoics concerning virtue. 384
Studies turn into character. 26, 467
One must not contend with a fool. 483
Sturm's works on Cicero and Hermogenes. 35
Concise style and the intemperance of learning. 37
Contentious subtlety. 38
Successes to be attributed to fortune, not to virtue or industry. 512
Amber attracts straws. 301
Sulfur makes steel flow. 302
The highest good of the heathens is not to be disputed by Christians. 431, 432
The highest ring of the natural chain affixed to the throne of Jupiter. 11
The superstition of the common people is a panic terror. 160.
A shoot engrafted into the trunk of a tree. 301
Whether a person hard of hearing can be helped by an instrument. 305, 306
Suspicion and distrust. 47
Whether a prince should believe sycophants. 491
Sulla's vow. 530
Sulla, fortunate, not great. 442
Sulla, disturber of the world. ibid.
Syllogism. 296, 297
Emblem of the present age. 137
Intimate sympathy of truth and good. 287

Of being silent

--- Page 691 ---
ET OF WORDS.
      T

The art of silence.                                473
  Silence gains trust.                             521
Tacitus's judgment concerning Augustus.              2
Tacitus's judgment concerning Claudius.            492
Tacitus's opinion concerning virtue.               506
  Judgment concerning Lepidus.                   ibid.
Tacitus notes a different manner of speaking in Tiberius.
                                                   516
Telesius of Cosenza.                               214
Times in which there is ruin for great virtues.    506
Not much time should be spent.                     537
Time like a river.                                  48
Land powerful in arms and fertile soil.            551
The Earth as a globe compared with the universe.    81
Hanging land.                                      318
Panic terrors, what they are.                      160
Themistocles' uncivil saying.                      546
Themistocles' reply.                               607
Themistocles' words.                                30
Theology, the Sabbath of all labors and wanderings.
                                                   593
  is drawn from the word of God, not from nature.  596
Theology, three appendices.                        595
Natural theology.                                  185
  leads to refuting Atheism.                     ibidem.
  not for establishing religion.                 ibid.
Theology consists of three parts.                  106
Innumerable theological writings.                  605
                                              Therma-

--- Page 692 ---
**INDEX OF SUBJECTS**

*The composition of artificial baths is desired.* 261
*Why Tiberius never watched public games.*
*Tigellinus having probed Nero's fears.* 520
*Tigranes the Armenian is defeated by the Romans, whose power*
*he scorned.* 548
*Timoleon, a most fortunate man.* 387
*His deeds are compared by Plutarch with those of Agesilaus &*
*Epaminondas.* ibid.
*Timotheus the Athenian.* 511
*We imitate thunder & lightning.* 305
*Its inventor, a monk.* ibid.
*Division of Topics into general & particular.*
315
*Particular Topics, most necessary & fruitful.*
316
*But it is desired.* 317, 318
*The handing down of the lamp is desired.* 357
*Methodical delivery.* 358, 359
*Delivery by aphorisms.* 358
*Division of the Traditive art & its instrument.* 340
*Trajan's life, a model.* 469
*Trajan, an admirer of learning.* ibid.
*What the transcendent conditions of beings are.* 183
*The doctrine & inquiry concerning them is desired.*
184, 185
*Three intemperances of doctrine.* 34
*Three aims for prolonging life.* 266
*The taxes of the Belgians are called excises: those of the English,*
*subsidies.* 550
*A people oppressed by taxes does not become warlike.*
ibid.
*Of three-*

--- Page 693 ---
ET WORDS.
*Triumphs, trophies, largesses, crowns, titles, privileges bestowed upon soldiers in a war successfully*
    *waged.*                                  559
*A triumph comprises three good things.*      559, 560
*Tunic of the Savior.*                          602
*Turks give alms to animals.*             493
*Typhon entangled in nets.*               161
*Typocosmia.*                                 364
*Whether it is permitted to kill a tyrant.*                453

                  V

[Large initial V] *alentine Borgia, from priest to soldier.*       524
  *Vanity of vanities.*                        542
*Various empires are noted.*                      83
*Variation of experiment.*                       300
*Variety of faces and words.*          249, 250
*Velleius the Epicurean.*                         331
*When the vein of the forehead is to be cut.*              308
*Hunting for Bread.*                              299
*Custom of hunters.*                              461
*True fame emanates from domestics.*               520
*How harlot-like words may be detected.*    517
*Words are images of things.*                   36
*Faith is to be given to the Word of God, even when reason resists.*
    *reason.*                                     595
*The splendor of words is not to be condemned.*             36
*Distinction of truth and goodness.*            82
*Sympathy of the true and the good.*                      287
*Limits of the observance of truth.*                   29
*Verulam administered the kingdom.*            544
    *He held many degrees of honor.*        545
    *Having long enjoyed royal addresses.*            ibid.
                                       arts,

--- Page 694 ---
INDEX OF THINGS
    applied himself to arts, histories & laws. ibid.
Vespasian changed for the better. 459
Multi-colored vestment of the church. 602
Way of reaching Astrology. 206
Naval victory. 558
Spirit of wine. 303
Wine, the fuel of common desire. 175
Wine is made from fruits. 305
External forces accomplish nothing, unless the nation is strong.
548
Virgil's Georgics are commended. 430, 431
Virgil connects the knowledge of causes with the overcoming of fear. 81
He assigns by far the best honors to Augustus. 83
Virgil put homeland studies last. 12
Even the smallest vices of illustrious men immediately catch the eyes of men. 489
Virtue can hardly be distinguished from a hidden emotion. 177
Virtue not to be cultivated, according to Machiavelli.
540
Imitable virtue. 387
Virtue is chosen for its own sake, not for popular favor. 384
Virtue, if it could be seen, would stir up immense love for itself. 368
Intellectual virtues. 1
For virtue, no way is impassable. 512
How the diminution of virtue occurs. 527
The reward of virtue is virtue. 542
Men who are stubborn and intractable, inept at adapting.
533
Mental sluggishness harmful for managing affairs. ibid.
Life

--- Page 695 ---
AND OF WORDS.
Life is short, art is long.                                 218
Life.                                                              126
A kind of life suitable to one's nature is to be chosen.      523
The prolongation of life is desired in medicine.       263
Life is like a road.                                             541
The punishment of vice is vice itself.                       542
Vice takes refuge under the shadow of virtue.               375
   It lies hidden by the proximity of good.               ibid. & 528
Shadows gather upon the white.                  308
A treatise on the degrees of unity in the City of God
      is desired.                                              602
The will to deceive and the ease of believing are neighboring.
                                                                        42
The arts of pleasure.                                            433
Pleasures flourish, with the Republic declining.          272
Urbanity and agreeableness of manners, when they
      ought to be sought for aid.                             478
      It is the garment of the soul.                                     ibid.
      What kind it ought to be.                                 ibid.
What fortified cities are without a strong people.     548
Divers.                                                    270
Practice overcomes both nature and art.                    294
The fable of Aesop concerning the Fox and the Cat.                      390
What the composure of the countenance may afford.                     476

                                   X

Xenophon the Athenian.               13
   Xenophon having set out with Cyrus the Younger into Asia.
         departed.                                              78
   He replies to Falinus.                                         79
   Xenophon led the army back from Babylon into Greece.
         led back.                                              ibid.
                                                               Of Zeno

--- Page 696 ---
INDEX OF SUBJECTS
**Z**eno's, Socrates', & Epicurus' schools.
436, 437
Pyrrho's, & Herillus'. 437
Tares. 602

T H E E N D .

[Decorative floral tailpiece]
